=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
YORK NOTES 

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
miommai M-t ■coim- 
Hagley Road Centre 
This book is to be returned on or before the lost date stamped below. 
» 3 DEC 2016 
OCT 
NOTES BY STEVE ROBERTS 
STOURBRIDGE COLLEGE 
Longman York Press 

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
The right of Steve Roberts to be identified as Author of this Work has 
been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988 
YORK PRESS 
322 Old Brompton Road, London SW5 9JH 
PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED 
Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, 
Essex CM20 2JE, United Kingdom 
Associated companies, branches and representatives throughout the world 
© Librairie du Liban Publishers 2008 
Quotations from The Bloody Chamber by Angela Carter copyright © 1979 
Angela Carter. Reproduced by permission of the Estate of Angela Carter c/o 
Rogers, Coleridge and White Ltd, 20 Powis Mews, London W111JN 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without either the prior 
written permission of the Publishers or a licence permitting restricted 
copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency 
Ltd, Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London ECiN 8TS 
First published 2008 
Third impression 2009 
ISBN 978-1-4058-9616-0 
Phototypeset by Pantek Arts Ltd, Maidstone, Kent 
Printed in China 

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Contents 
Part One 
Introduction 
Studying short stories.5 
Reading The Bloody Chamber.6 
Part Two 
The text 
Note on the text.11 
Synopsis .12 
Detailed summaries 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 1-14.13 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 14-26.20 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 26-8.27 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 28-42 .30 
The Courtship of Mr Lyon.36 
The Tiger’s Bride.40 
Puss-in-Boots.44 
The Snow Child.47 
The Lady of the House of Love .50 
The Company of Wolves.54 
Wolf-Alice.57 
Extended commentaries 
Text 1 - The Bloody Chamber, pages 8-11.60 
Text 2 - The Erl-King.63 
Text 3 - The Werewolf.  65 
Text 4 - The Ladv of the House of Love, pages 113-16.67 
Part Three 
Critical approaches 
Characterisation.70 
The narrator protagonist.71 
The predatory patriarch and the absent father.73 
The innocent male.75 
The matriarch .75 
The victim.77 
The independent woman .79 
The human animal .79 
Themes 
Marriage.80 
Sexuality .82 

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Metamorphosis .85 
Beauty and wealth.86 
Man, woman and nature .88 
Structure.92 
Narrative techniques.92 
Language and style.95 
Metaphor.98 
Imagery, allusion and intertextuality.100 
Origins.102 
Part Four 
Critical perspectives 
Reading critically.105 
Original reception.105 
Later criticism .106 
Contemporary approaches 
Feminism .108 
Marxism.111 
Part Five 
Background 
Angela Carter’s life and works .114 
Literary background 
The Gothic tradition.116 
Medieval influences .120 
Postmodern and Mannerist influences.120 
Historical background.121 
Chronology.  124 
Further reading.130 
Literary terms.141 
Author of these notes .147 
oSzwvi® £ 
j • nv ? 
4 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Part One 
Introduction 
Studying short stories 
Reading short stories and exploring them critically can be 
approached in a number of ways, but when reading the text for the 
first time it is a good idea to consider some, or all, of the following: 
• Format and style: how do short stories differ from other 
genres? How are paragraphs or other divisions used to reveal 
information? Is there a narrator, and if so, how does he or she 
convey both his or her emotions and those of the characters? 
• The writer’s perspective: consider what the writer has to say, 
how he or she presents a particular view of people, the world, 
society, ideas, issues, etc. Are, or were, these views controversial 
and are there different perspectives within the collection? 
• Shape and structure: explore how the narrative of the story 
develops - the moments of revelation and reflection, openings 
and endings, conflicts and resolutions. Is there one single plot or 
are there multiple ones? How do the different stories within the 
collection compare in this regard? 
• Choice of language: does the writer choose to write formally or 
informally? Does he or she use different registers for characters, 
narrators or groups, vary the sound and style, or employ 
language features such as imagery and dialect? 
• Links and connections: what other texts does this short story 
or collection of stories remind you of? Can you see connections 
between its narrative, characters and ideas and those of other 
texts you have studied? Is the story or collection part of a 
literary movement or tradition? 
• Your perspective and that of others: what are your feelings 
about the short story or collection? Can you relate to the 
narrators, characters, themes and ideas? What do others say 
about it - for example critics, or other writers? 
These York Notes offer an introduction to The Bloody Chamber 
and cannot substitute for close reading of the text and the study of 
secondary sources. 
CONTEXT 
In her introduction 
to The Virago 
Book of Fairy Tales 
Carter states that 
'fairy tales, folk 
tales, stories from 
the oral tradition, 
are all of them 
the most vital 
connection we 
have with the 
imaginations of 
the ordinary men 
and women whose 
labour created our 
world' (1990, 
reprinted in 
Angela Carter's 
Book of Fairy Tales 
in 2005, p. xi). 
V___/ 
The Bloody Chamber 5 

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Reading The Bloody Chamber Introduction 
CONTEXT 
The notion of feral 
children, still 
current in the 
diched phrase 
'wild child', has a 
long historical 
tradition in 
folklore and 
legend - Greek 
mythology has 
many examples of 
the maternal role 
being fulfilled by 
animals. For more 
on this see 
Detailed 
summaries: 
Wolf-Alice. 
\____y 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Carter wrote the 
screenplay for The 
Magic Toyshop in 
1987, and this was 
directed by David 
Wheatley for 
Granada TV. 
Reading The Bloody Chamber 
In this collection of short stories, Angela Carter offers the reader an 
unsettling experience - from the first tale, provocatively derived 
from the most notorious works of eighteenth-century erotic 
literature, to the last, a powerful combination of medieval and 
modern notions on the feral nature of children. The artifice of the 
tales and the narrative devices used to interweave old and new 
material into stories that seem so familiar and yet so strange invite 
the reader to question the purpose of the collection. In turn, this 
leads us to consider what effect Carter intends the stories to have 
on us as readers and how she achieves this effect. 
Carter established her early reputation as a writer in the 1960s with 
the novels Shadow Dance (1966) and The Magic Toyshop (1967). 
Grotesque elements recalling the Gothic genre were already a feature 
of her writing. In the 1970s The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor 
Hoffman (1972) and her first collection of short stories, Fireworks: 
Nine Profane Pieces (1974), marked a turn towards more consciously 
feminist views. Her second collection, The Bloody Chamber, was 
published in the same year as her writings on the Marquis de Sade: The 
Sadeian Woman (1979). Her later novels, Nights at the Circus (1984) 
and Wise Children (1991), explore at greater length some of the themes 
developed in The Bloody Chamber (1979). 
The stories in The Bloody Chamber take their inspiration from fairy 
tales, variants of older European folk tales that existed long before 
they were ever captured in writing. Carter uses versions of the 
stories that are attributed to the French authors Charles Perrault 
(‘Bluebeard’, ‘Little Red Riding Hood’, ‘Puss-in-Boots’, ‘Sleeping 
Beauty’) and Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot de Villeneuve (‘Beauty and 
the Beast’), to the Brothers Grimm (‘Snow White’) and to German 
and Scandinavian folklore (‘The Erl-King’). Helen Simpson, in her 
introduction to the 2006 Vintage edition of The Bloody Chamber, 
suggests that Carter did not want to present a simplistic feminist 
revision of these fairy tales. Her declared intention, in her own 
words, was ‘to extract the latent content from the traditional stories 
and to use it as the beginnings of new stories’ (pp. vii-viii). 
6 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Introduction Reading The Bloody Chamber 
These ‘new stories’, presented to us in such lurid and exotic fashion, 
include a memoir of an innocent young girl rescued from her 
marriage to a serial murderer by her mother, aided by her blind 
lover; two retellings of ‘Beauty and the Beast’, first in unspecified 
modern times with the beast transforming into a man, and then its 
inversion where a woman beautifully transforms into the beast; a 
pantomime Puss-in-Boots revelling in anthropomorphic anarchy; a 
dreamlike fantasia of desire and loss in a wild wood; a tale of sexual 
jealousy that bears little resemblance to Snow White and the Seven 
Dwarfs (1937), Hollywood’s first full-length animated film; a 
vampire’s reprieve foreshadowing the calamity of war; and three 
variants on ‘Little Red Riding Hood’: one with Grandma as a 
werewolf, one with the girl embracing the wolf, and one where 
the girl and the wolf are virtually indistinguishable. 
Despite the individual power of these tales, another theme can be 
traced through them as a collection - the development of the female 
role. The progression of this development is striking in its obvious 
simplicity: Carter’s female ‘victims’ become gradually empowered 
by embracing desire and passion as a human animal. To exaggerate 
this aspect of the collection would diminish the impact of each tale 
in itself, but it does reveal The Bloody Chamber as very much a 
product of its time and of the concerns of the feminist movement 
in the late 1970s. The issue of the empowerment of women 
and, particularly, the challenge to conventional depictions of 
'heterosexual relationships in literature, art and the media were part 
of the controversial agenda advanced by the feminist intelligentsia 
of the period. Feminists today might argue that it is easy, with 
hindsight, to underestimate how male-dominated British society 
was at the time. They might also argue that it is just as easy to 
exaggerate the progress towards equal opportunity that has 
rendered feminist perspectives almost passe for many young 
people now. 
Carter’s experiment with forms and content of traditional tales may 
or may not provide ‘new stories’ to a twenty-first-century audience, 
but her attempt to explore female sexuality as human behaviour 
challenged her contemporaries. Her work, whatever her intentions, 
does not represent stereotypical feminist views of women as either 
CONTEXT 
The ability to 
change, through 
transformation or 
metamorphosis, can 
be both a negative 
and a positive 
attribute in 
folklore. Many 
creatures in nature 
have the ability to 
adapt their 
appearance or go 
through some form 
of radical change. 
In popular tales, 
these abilities are 
often transferred to 
human or inhuman 
shape-shifters who 
deceive or entrap 
the unwary child. V___7 
CONTEXT 
The term 'second- 
wave feminism' 
arises from 
Germaine Greer's 
The Female Eunuch 
(1970). Greer 
acknowledges the 
political differences 
between earlier 
feminists and later 
generations when 
she writes that for 
many women 
activists in the 
1960s and 1970s 
'the call for 
revolution came 
before the call for 
the liberation of 
women' (1981 
edition, p. 16). 
The Bloody Chamber 7 

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Reading The Bloody Chamber Introduction 
heroic fighters against, or passive victims of, patriarchal 
dominance. Neither do these tales comment on or describe directly 
the experience of women in late 1970s Britain, a time of radical 
political and social change where new laws were offering hope 
of an end to sexual discrimination in employment and education; 
medical advances in birth control such as the pill were changing the 
conventions of sexual conduct; and positions of real political power 
and influence were being taken by women. The election of Margaret 
Thatcher as the first female prime minister in 1979 was seen by 
many as a significant historical moment for women. 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Willy Russell's play 
Educating Rita 
(1980) was made 
into a film in 1983 
starring Julie 
Walters and Michael 
Caine. Russell gives 
the notion of how 
men shape women 
to their own desires, 
previously explored 
by George Bernard 
Shaw's Pygmalion 
(first performed in 
1913), a modern 
feminist slant. 
Shakespeare, in The 
Winter's Tale (1611), 
also draws on the 
Greek myth of 
Pygmalion and 
Galatea. 
Issues of class and power are as present in Carter’s stories as they 
are in the ‘traditional’ tales from which they are derived, but not 
in the same idealised, noble or benign form. Carter makes use of 
the stereotypes of greed and cruelty associated with aristocratic 
privilege to define her male characters, and wealth and luxury 
appear as evidence of the decadence of male authority. For Carter, 
personal conflicts are shaped by gender and by social class. Her 
stories examine relationships between individuals affected by an 
imbalance of power. The resolution of the conflict is often 
surprising, however. Carter plunges into the realm of fantasy, 
exploring the mysteries of sexual attraction in ways that are 
informed by, but do not entirely conform to, the conventional 
wisdom of feminist and socialist perspectives (much to the 
annoyance of some of her contemporaries). 
The short stories in The Bloody Chamber require the reader to 
consider the uncertain point at which the grossly repellent becomes 
attractive and desirable. For some communities, any and all 
depictions of sexuality are shocking. Carter moves from using 
graphic depictions of ‘beast-like’ behaviour to sensual reveries that 
entice and almost seduce the reader into strange and disturbing 
reactions, such as the description of the unnamed ‘slim volume’ 
(‘The Bloody Chamber’, p. 12) containing the picture of the 
‘Reproof of curiosity’ (p. 13) and the ‘certain queasy craving’ the 
piano-player feels for the ‘thousand, thousand baroque intersections 
of flesh upon flesh’ (p. 19). At times the tone is mocking or 
aggressively confrontational; at others the reader is allowed to 
see even the most monstrous of creatures in a sympathetic light. 
By choosing the form of traditional tales as the place to expose 
8 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Introduction Reading The Bloody Chamber 
the content of social myths and narratives - such as the supposed 
gentle nature of the ‘fair sex’; the purity of virginity; and the alleged 
attractions of the ‘alpha male’ - Carter is perhaps asking the reader 
to follow a new but carefully signposted pathway through familiar 
psychological territory. 
One of the problems of deliberate use of symbolism in literature 
and art is, of course, the assumption that the symbol employed will 
convey the associated meaning to the audience. Many children, for 
example, encounter revisions of fairy stories, by Roald Dahl and 
others, without first knowing the tales in an earlier or original form. 
Through the globalisation of the media we are more aware of the 
great diversity of international cultures than ever before - a far cry 
from the oral, word of mouth tradition in which the fairy tale 
originated. On the surface, these narratives may appear to have lost 
their dominant position in the imagination of younger readers. But 
are the psychological landscapes they map out (for example the 
forest as a place of fearful discovery and metaphor for the dangers 
of the adult world; the wolf as sexual predator and metaphor of 
human appetites) so unrecognisable? Do they not function in 
Carter’s tales just as in those original stories, regardless of any 
familiarity on the part of the reader with other texts? Where does 
that leave us with the deliberate, intricately ornate layers of 
intertextuality employed by Carter in these stories? 
• Carter flirts with elements of Gothic literature in many of the 
tales. The imagery of blood and passion, the overwhelming forces 
of nature and supernatural entities, and the tremulous anticipation 
of horrible events are all derived from the genre established in the 
latter part of the eighteenth century by works such as Horace 
Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto (1764), Matthew G. Lewis’s 
The Monk (1796) and Ann Radcliffe’s The Mysteries of Udolpho 
(1794). The intricacies of human behaviour are constructed by 
Carter within the typically Gothic architecture of towers and 
secret passages (the sexual metaphor is neither accidental nor 
masked). 
‘The Bloody Chamber’, the tale that gives the collection its title, is 
an allegory of female self-discovery. The search for knowledge as a 
means of personal emancipation defined feminism for many women 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
Dahl's poems in 
Revolting Rhymes 
(1982) reinterpret 
the fairy tales 
'Cinderella', 'Jack 
and the Beanstalk', 
'Snow White and 
the Seven Dwarfs', 
'Goldilocks and the 
Three Bears', 'Little 
Red Riding Hood' 
and 'The Three 
Little Pigs'. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Bram Stoker's 
Dracula (1897) was 
originally dismissed 
as 'an artistic 
mistake' by a 
reviewer in the 
Manchester 
Guardian, though 
others regarded 
it favourably in 
comparison with 
the works of Edgar 
Allan Poe (1809-49) 
and Mary Shelley 
(1797-1851). 
The Bloody Chamber 9 

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Reading The Bloody Chamber Introduction 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In the chapter 
entitled 
'Storytelling at 
home and at school' 
in Supporting 
Children in the Early 
Years (1995), edited 
by Robin Campbell 
and Linda Miller, 
Carol Fox examines 
the imaginative 
oral storytelling of 
pre-school children 
with extensive 
experience of 
hearing stories read 
aloud. She shows 
that 'the impact of 
hearing so many 
stories before 
school started was 
enormous, and 
affected their 
linguistic, narrative, 
and cognitive 
development 
profoundly' (p. 30). 
Fox highlights how 
'Fantasy can liberate 
us all from the 
restrictions of real 
here-and-now 
experience' (p. 39). 
at the time. Whether this search remains as urgent for younger 
readers today, who might not see themselves and their concerns 
in these stories in quite the same way, is debatable; but questions 
about the place of the female voice in society and the presence or 
absence of female sexuality in the mainstream media are still raised 
by texts such as Eve Ensler’s The Vagina Monologues (first staged 
in 1996) that present a provocative challenge to the perceived 
male-dominated culture of the twenty-first century. The Bloody 
Chamber, three decades after its publication, is still compelling and 
alienating, horribly fascinating and startlingly sensuous. The stories 
carefully combine wonderful, rich and complex patterns of exotic, 
sometimes esoteric, language into crafted prose that works on the 
reader’s imagination with the precision of poetry. Carter, telling 
her stories with great skill, draws us always on towards some 
inexplicably attractive and dangerous place where we are invited to 
question what we might have been led to believe, once upon a time, 
about how to behave in the adult world. 
10 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Part Two 
The text 
Note on the text 
When this collection of stories was published as The Bloody 
Chamber in 1979 by Victor Gollancz, only two tales, ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ and ‘The Tiger’s Bride’, had not been seen or heard 
before (though, in one sense, all the stories have been seen and 
heard before by most of us). The other eight are revisions of 
Angela Carter’s earlier stories or radio scripts. 
‘The Erl-King’ and ‘The Company of Wolves’ appeared in the 
literary magazine Bananas that had been set up in 1975 by the 
novelist Emma Tennant. ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ appeared 
in a 1975 edition of the American literary magazine The Iowa 
Review, having been adapted by Carter from her radio drama 
script Vampirella (not broadcast on BBC Radio 4 until 1976). ‘The 
Werewolf’ appeared in 1977 in the October edition of South-West 
Arts Review. ‘Wolf-Alice’ appeared in a 1977 edition of the literary 
magazine Stand. ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ appeared in the April 
1978 edition of Vogue magazine. ‘The Snow Child’ was first 
broadcast on BBC Radio 4. ‘Puss-in-Boots’ also appeared in 
Emma Tennant’s anthology The Straw and the Gold, published 
by Pierrot Books in 1979. 
CHECK 
THE NET 
A very useful 
resource on fairy 
tales can be found 
at www.surlalune 
fairytales.com 
After The Bloody Chamber was published, Carter went on to 
adapt ‘The Company of Wolves’ and ‘Puss-in-Boots’ for radio. 
‘The Company of Wolves’ was developed into a screenplay for the 
cinema by Carter and director Neil Jordan in 1984. The version 
of the text used in the preparation of these Notes is the edition of 
The Bloody Chamber published by Vintage in 2006, featuring an 
introduction by Helen Simpson (published in much the same form 
as an article in the Guardian the same year). 
The Bloody Chamber n 

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Synopsis The text 
CONTEXT 
Pantomime, in 
its modern form 
a peculiarly 
British tradition, 
combines various 
traditions of 
the commedia 
dell'arte, medieval 
theatre. 
Renaissance 
theatre and the 
Victorian music 
hall. The first 
recognisable 
pantomimes were 
eighteenth-century 
harlequinades and 
featured much 
physical comedy 
and clowning. 
V___ 
CONTEXT 
'Panto time', being 
typically around 
Christmas, is a 
connection with 
the licensed 
temporary chaos 
of the medieval 
Feast of Fools 
presided over by a 
'Lord of Misrule'. 
Magical beings, 
cross-dressing, 
transformation 
scenes, bawdy 
humour and 
rude audience 
participation are 
the distinctive 
traditions of British 
pantomime. 
v _X 
Synopsis 
The tales, singularly and as a collection, revolve around themes of 
death and love; treachery and cruelty; redemption and salvation; 
and, above all, the possibility of change. Nearly all the tales are 
framed in a European winter landscape that signifies the bleakness 
and miserable hardship of life. But the tone of the collection as a 
whole is not characterised by that coldness alone. The dourness is 
relieved by the exuberance of pantomime mockery and madness; 
and Carter’s determined perspective on the powerful possibilities 
of transformation brings hope and strength to the women in 
the tales. 
Below is a synopsis of ‘The Bloody Chamber’, the longest story 
in the collection. Summaries of the other stories can be found 
in Detailed summaries; ‘The Erl-King’ and ‘The Werewolf’ are 
analysed in Extended commentaries. 
Carter tells the first story through the narrative voice of the main 
female character, who recounts her experience of ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ in seven major episodes. Each episode is marked by a 
break in the text indicating a pause in the narrative flow. These 
breaks help to mark the passage of time and add emphasis to 
significant moments in the story. The first two episodes establish 
the young bride’s arrival in the matrimonial home, her relationship 
with her husband, and the contrast between her former life in the 
French capital and the opulence of her new circumstances in a 
remote part of Brittany. It becomes clear that the story is taking 
place at some imprecise time around the end of the nineteenth 
century. 
The third and fourth episodes develop the young wife’s boredom 
and curiosity into a dilemma that threatens her relationship with her 
husband: should she obey his instruction or follow her desire to 
discover more about him? The fifth episode shows her experiencing 
the transformation of her dilemma into a crisis of mortal danger. 
The sixth and seventh episodes show the crisis moving towards its 
climax, where she faces the consequences of her actions, aided by a 
true companion (the blind piano-tuner) against the murderous 
12 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
intentions of her husband. The resolution of the crisis, provided 
by her heroic mother, leaves the wife widowed with rich rewards: 
wealth, love and happiness. These pleasures are handled with care 
in the denouement of the story, which restores the character of 
the young woman through love and personal fulfilment. 
Detailed summaries 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 1-14 
^.-.-.-.---.-_ 
• A young bride travels from Paris through the night with her 
much older husband towards her new home, a large and 
isolated castle in Brittany. 
• She describes her introduction to a world of luxury and 
pleasure. 
• Their honeymoon unfolds in ways she had not expected. 
The story begins as a memoir, a tale remembered by its principal 
character some time after the events described. The story is set, 
vaguely, at the turn of the century, when the end of the nineteenth 
becomes the beginning of the twentieth century. A young woman, 
anticipating her wedding night, lies awake on a train taking her far 
away from her childhood home. She recalls her mother’s concerns 
about her feelings for the rich aristocrat who is now her husband. 
She ponders the age difference between them and his delicate 
courtship, realising she does not know him very well. She is aware 
of his three previous marriages and his almost unimaginable wealth; 
although she feels there might be something strange in the Marquis’s 
desires, she is excited and enthralled by him. 
The couple arrive at the castle for their honeymoon and are greeted 
without much warmth by the housekeeper. The moment of the 
consummation of their marriage is postponed by the Marquis, and 
the wife is left to her own devices. Frustrated to find her wedding 
gift, a piano, is slightly out of tune, she browses in the Marquis’s 
CONTEXT 
'The Bloody 
Chamber' is 
set during the 
Third Republic in 
France, a period 
synonymous with 
corruption, 
decadence 
and defeat. 
La Troisieme 
Republique began 
following the 
collapse of 
Napoleonic 
imperialism in 
1870, and the 
politically unstable 
situation saw the 
rise and fall of the 
Paris Commune 
(1871); the Panama 
Canal Company 
bankruptcy scandal 
(1893); and the 
famous Dreyfus 
Affair that led to 
the publication of 
Emile Zola's open 
letter 'J'Accuse' 
(1898). The Third 
Republic ended 
with the 
capitulation 
to fascism in 
1940 and the 
establishment of 
the Vichy regime. 
V_ _/ 
The Bloody Chamber 13 

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 1-14 continued 
CONTEXT 
In Perrault's tale 
Bluebeard is a 
wealthy aristocrat 
who persuades a 
local girl to marry 
him. Immediately 
he announces he 
has to go away, 
and gives his new 
wife the keys of 
the chateau, 
including one 
to a room she is 
forbidden to enter. 
Unable to resist 
temptation, she 
enters it and 
discovers her 
husband's three 
dead wives. She 
relocks the door, 
but the key is 
bloodstained. 
Bluebeard returns 
and threatens to 
kill her, but her 
brothers rescue her 
at the last moment. 
Bluebeard is killed; 
with her inherited 
wealth she restores 
the fortunes of her 
family and finds 
herself a decent 
husband. V___X 
CONTEXT 
The structure 
of Carter's 'The 
Bloody Chamber' is 
close to Perrault's 
original model, 
though her 
intended moral 
is different. Vs___/ 
library. She discovers some books with explicit sexual content, and 
shocks herself by viewing the images. The Marquis finds her with 
his books and leads her back to the bedroom to take her virginity. 
Commentary 
The structure of the story is provided by the plot adapted from the 
European fairy tale ‘Le Barbe Bleue’ (‘Bluebeard’), written in 1697 
by Charles Perrault as a moral tale instructing children to be wary 
of being overcurious, but that is not immediately apparent - and 
indeed it may not be obvious to many who are unfamiliar with this 
tale - as Carter begins by deliberately parodying the linguistic style 
of erotic literature, mostly written by men, that presents the ‘sexual 
awakening’ of young women as a spectacle for voyeuristic 
entertainment. The first paragraph sets a feverish tone, as the 
narrator recalls the ‘delicious ecstasy’ of a young woman, just 
seventeen years old, anticipating her wedding night, with her 
‘burning cheek’ and ‘pounding ... heart’ linked to the mockery 
of cliched mechanical phallic imagery: the train’s ‘great pistons 
ceaselessly thrusting’ (p. 1). We get a sense that the narrator sees her 
younger self as an entirely different person, and the adoption of a 
detached narrative perspective positions the reader at a certain 
distance from the immediacy of the character’s experiences. The 
narrator implies she has been changed by the events of this story, 
though it is not clear how much older she has become since the 
events took place. 
The first part of the story is set up as a journey, a metaphor for the 
emotional and physical journey the young girl is experiencing as 
she leaves the security of her childhood home and enters the adult 
world for the first time as an individual in her own right. Her view 
of her destination, ‘the unguessable country of marriage’ (p. 1), is 
reminiscent of Hamlet’s ‘undiscovered country’ as Shakespeare has 
his dithering prince contemplate the journey from life to death, 
‘from whose bourne / No traveller returns’ (Hamlet, Act III 
Scene 1). Carter seems to be suggesting at the start of this journey, 
with this intertextual echo, that there is a connection between 
sex, marriage and death. 
14 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
Marriage is represented in the symbol of the wedding ring, the 
traditional love token that signifies marital status. Carter’s narrator 
introduces this symbol with her awareness of a ‘pang of loss’ for her 
youth and freedom (p. 1). The female life roles of mother, daughter 
and wife are interwoven in the image of the wedding ring, with the 
‘gold band’ (p. 1) symbolising the ownership of the woman and the 
price agreed between the mother and the Marquis for the exchange. 
The act of putting on the ring marks the end of childhood, a 
severing of the link with her mother, and prepares her for the 
process of becoming a mother herself. The theme of maturation, 
growing up, and an exploration of what it means for a girl to 
become a woman are embedded in this story. But Carter, 
without being obvious or overly didactic, is positioning the reader 
to become aware of and question the gender stereotypes at work 
in the typical ‘rites of passage’ recounting of sexual experience. 
By working within the conventions of a narrative form devised 
by men to depict women in certain limited ways, Carter is 
simultaneously adopting and subverting the genre of erotic 
literature. How successful her attempt is at turning the genre inside 
out, as it were, is open to question, and this has been a particular 
focus for feminist critics (see Contemporary approaches: 
Feminism). 
The character of the mother is established early on as ‘adventurous’ 
and indomitable’ (p. 1), capable of dealing with pirates, plague and 
man-eating tigers as a teenager, but reduced to poverty by marrying 
for love and being widowed by war not long after. The narrator’s 
memory of her father is only the sadness of his loss: ‘a legacy of 
tears that never quite dried’ (p. 2). In contrast, the mother is armed 
and prepared to defend herself against any threat. 
The male character, the aristocratic businessman, is introduced at 
first as a mysterious abstraction, a masculine pronoun that only 
gradually takes on more identity as the story unfolds. He is 
associated primarily with symbols of wealth - ‘gold’ and a ‘gigantic 
box’, though the mother evidently distrusts the apparent generosity 
of the ‘wedding dress ... wrapped up ... like a Christmas gift (p. 1) 
- and takes on direct physical form as a ‘kiss’ and a ‘rasp of beard’ 
(p. 2). The narrator builds his identity through recalling his ‘opulent 
CONTEXT 
Bluebeard is 
sometimes the 
name given to the 
English pirate 
Edward Teach 
(c. 1680-1718), who 
was also known as 
Blackbeard. 
Although he is 
thought to have 
had around 
fourteen wives, this 
eighteenth-century 
privateer was not 
known as a pirate 
when Perrault's tale 
was published. The 
two legends have 
been confused 
and sometimes 
deliberately blurred 
by various writers. V _2 
The Bloody Chamber 15 

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 1-14 continued 
CONTEXT 
Donatien Alphonse 
Francois de Sade 
(1740-1814), 
known as the 
Marquis de Sade 
(although the title 
was an adopted 
rank, de Sade 
was an aristocrat), 
was condemned 
to death in 1772 
for his cruelty and 
sexual 
transgressions. 
Escaping, he was 
later imprisoned at 
Vincennes and in 
the Bastille, where 
he wrote works of 
perversion and 
fantasy, among 
them Les 120 
Journees de 
Sodome (written in 
1784). De Sade's 
writing reflects the 
revolutionary 
upheaval of the 
times in which he 
lived, and, though 
the content is 
undoubtedly 
offensive to many, 
his political and 
philosophical 
views have 
been largely 
overshadowed by 
the scandalous 
nature of his life 
and reputation. 
V___/ 
male scent’ (p. 3), and Carter places her characters in a mating game 
that links the ‘exquisite tact’ (p. 2) of his courtship of the girl to 
the attentiveness of a lion stalking his prey. The explicit reference 
to his ‘dark mane’ (p. 3) is the first of many allusions to his bestial 
qualities. His title is revealed when he is introduced as ‘my Marquis’ 
(p. 4), but he bears no other name. His identity is not fully revealed; 
this is emphasised by the description of his face as a ‘perfectly 
smooth’ mask (p. 3). 
Almost immediately after the Marquis has been introduced as a 
mysterious enigma, he is explicitly linked to a symbol that will recur 
throughout the story. Carter allows her narrator to make a strange 
comparison between the man, as ‘a sentient vegetable’, and a flower 
commonly associated with ‘funereal’ matters: the lily (p. 3). The 
suggestion here is that his cultured manners, calm detachment and 
composure are the product of an inhuman nature: he has the capacity 
to think but no real awareness of other people’s feelings. There is 
‘gravity’ (p. 4) in his desire for her which she cannot resist, and this 
seems to be linked somehow to the impact of lilies, with their beauty 
and almost overpowering heavy perfume, on the senses. 
The Marquis remains shapeless and mysterious while the narrator 
recounts the beauty, talent and tragic demise of his first three wives; 
and she is clearly flattered by his invitation ‘to join this gallery of 
beautiful women’ (p. 5). Carter here is giving her narrator an 
opportunity to foreshadow the events of the story in a seemingly 
innocent remark that also alludes to the original story of ‘Bluebeard’. 
The Marquis’s wedding gift to her is bound up with a history of 
cruelty and death. Inspired by the aristocratic remembrance of the 
guillotine, a ‘choker of rubies’, ‘bright as arterial blood’, emphasises 
his family’s tradition of ‘luxurious defiance’ (p. 6). She glimpses, 
indirectly in his reflection, the way he views her as a piece of meat. 
The narrator’s innocence and naivety attract the Marquis’s ‘carnal 
avarice’ (p. 6). These qualities of inexperience also explain her 
willingness to expose herself to dangers that her impoverished but 
secure life with her mother prevented her from knowing. There is a 
thrill and excitement in taking the risks involved in becoming an 
adult. The Marquis represents the mysterious appealing risk and the 
danger of the unknown. 
l6 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
The Marquis’s identity is forming through the particular details that 
accumulate around him. He indulges in the expensive habits of the 
bourgeois elite of the era: he goes to the opera; he wears a monocle; 
he bestows rich gifts to display his wealth and secure the affections 
of women much younger than he; he smokes cigars; and trains stop 
especially for him where there is no station. None of these are 
attributes likely to make him a sympathetic character to a modern 
audience. He is the ‘richest man in France’ (p. 8): what more need be 
said to define this character or direct our suspicion? 
Carter clearly has a perspective on social class that equates position 
and wealth with corruption. While the general modern reader may 
not share this perspective, particularly as the drive for equality in 
the 1970s has given way to a more entrepreneurial spirit in the 
twenty-first century, privilege that is inherited rather than earned 
is still often resented. The superiority inherent in definitions of 
aristocracy — that some people are born ‘noble’ and others are not - 
is challenged by Carter’s ideal of individual empowerment. For 
Carter, what women might choose to become is more important 
than who their parents are or, to be precise, who their father and 
grandfather might have been. The aristocratic father figure 
symbolises everything about patriarchal society that stops women 
having control of their own lives. Carter’s villain in ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ is a representative of the past, of patriarchy, of a dying 
social order: he is synonymous with death and decay. 
The symbol of the flower is used for a second time as the couple 
arrive in their bedroom, which is filled with white lilies. There is 
something sordid and corrupting about the way in which the 
Marquis strips the bride he has ‘acquired’ (p. 10). Carter allows her 
narrator to make a political and social point linking marriage and 
prostitution - the ‘formal disrobing of the bride, a ritual from the 
brothel’ (p. 11) - which can only heighten our sense of unease as the 
girl is ‘stripped’ to resemble the erotic art he collects. Particularly as, 
despite her awareness of having been a ‘bargain’ (p. 11), she admits 
she is aroused by his treatment of her. 
The postponement of his satisfaction, with no regard for her, hints 
again at a kind of sadism in the Marquis, who is controlling this 
CONTEXT 
The Marquis's 
monocle (p. 6) 
recalls Cyclops, in 
Greek mythology a 
member of a race 
of one-eyed giants. 
These giants were 
associated with 
elemental forces, 
brute strength 
and vicious 
temperaments. 
v _7 
CONTEXT 
There was, and 
still is, much 
acrimonious 
debate over 
whether class or 
gender should 
be the focus 
of political 
philosophy. 
American 
feminist writer 
Rebecca Walker is 
associated with 
what has become 
known as third- 
wave feminism 
since the early 
1990s; this involves 
the reappraisal of 
the achievements 
of Germaine 
Greer's generation 
from a perspective 
that prioritises 
gender and ethnic 
identity rather 
than class 
consciousness. 
v_y 
The Bloody Chamber 17 

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 1-14 continued 
CONTEXT 
Sadism is the term 
given to a number 
of sexual practices, 
associated with the 
Marquis de Sade, 
that share the 
characteristic of 
deriving pleasure 
from inflicting 
pain on someone 
else. 
v_/ 
CONTEXT 
Vlad Tepes, known 
as Vlad the Impaler 
owing to his 
custom of impaling 
his enemies on 
spikes, was a 
fifteenth-century 
Balkan ruler. A 
cruel and ruthless 
warrior, he was 
also well educated 
and a successful 
politician. 
scenario. When she finds herself becoming more acquainted with 
his collection of erotic art and literature, something begun in his 
courtship, it is the imagery of violence that is most directly 
communicated to the reader. The violence of the images is echoed 
and emphasised by the bluntness of the narrator’s language. Words 
commonly regarded as ‘coarse slang’ terms for human genitalia 
have their own shock impact even as the narration continues to 
describe graphic sexual images. At the same time, the more 
imaginative ‘split fig’ and ‘scimitar’ (p. 13) convey the vulnerability 
and aggression depicted in the image entitled ‘Reproof of 
curiosity’. The title is a reference to the moral of the original 
‘Bluebeard’. When the Marquis refers to these works of erotic 
fantasy as ‘prayerbooks’ (p. 13), he shows his devotion to 
the pursuit of sensuous pleasure: it is his principle, his religion. 
As he moves his bride into position for his consumption, 
the language refrains of ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ intrude upon 
the narrative. As the innocent girl protests about going to bed 
in ‘broad daylight’ (associating bed with sleep, which happens at 
night), the childhood reminder of the dangers of the adult world 
- the wolf - is thrust into the telling of the tale: ‘All the better to 
see you’ (p. 13). The connection is made clearly between the ‘old, 
monocled lecher’ (p. 11) and the wolf of fairy-tale tradition. 
The connection between sex and the Marquis’s fascination with 
death is made clear by his insistence on her wearing the ruby 
necklace as she is ‘impaled’ (p. 14) by him. The physical violence in 
this particular choice of verb is particularly striking, but it can 
also be seen as an allusion to vampirism, recalling the disputed 
connection between Bram Stoker’s Count Dracula and Vlad Tepes, 
the legendary Vlad the Impaler. In any case, the narrator does not 
resort to coy cliches or euphemisms here. Her sense of detachment 
as she reports the experience as it would have been seen in the 
multiple mirrors in the bedroom is chilling. As the reader’s attention 
is taken from the action in the bedroom, via its reflection in the 
mirrors, to the ‘mewing gulls’ flying outside the window, we have 
to consider what this implies about the girl’s first experience of sex. 
At the start of the next section she will go on to describe herself as 
‘infinitely dishevelled’ (p. 14) in that moment. 
18 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
See Extended commentaries: Text 1 for further discussion of part 
of this section. 
GLOSSARY 
1 wagon-lit a sleeping car on continental trains in the 
nineteenth century 
pistons the moving part in a steam engine that provides 
the thrust or motive force - a cliche of phallic imagery, 
especially in cinema 
Conservatoire a specialist school of music, particularly 
reserved for training the most talented musicians in the 
classical style 
2 junkful a junk is a kind of ship used in the notoriously 
pirate-infested waters of China and the East Indies 
reticule a small handbag, often of woven material, used 
by fashionable ladies of rank in the nineteenth century 
footpads a seventeenth-century term for a thief, 
particularly someone who ambushed travellers, similar 
in meaning to the more modern 'mugger' 
egregious similar in meaning originally to 'outstanding' or 
'excellent', mostly used as a criticism of blatant or flagrant 
conduct or behaviour 
sea-girt a seventeenth-century term, sometimes applied 
to a peninsula, indicating a piece of land surrounded by sea 
leonine lion-like, a term in use since the sixteenth century 
4 vellum fine writing material made from the skin of young 
animals 
8 calyx the outer covering of a flower still in bud 
deliquescent dissolving or melting away, sometimes used to 
suggest decay, rot or the decomposition of things that have 
died 
9 chatelaine the mistress of the house, the keeper of the keys 
11 voluptuary's a voluptuary is a seventeenth-century term for 
someone chiefly interested in their own pleasure, seeking 
luxury and delighting in sensation 
12 Eliphas Levy pen name of Alphonse Louis Constant, 
nineteenth-century occultist writer who had a strong 
influence on the spiritualist movement with his writings 
on magic 
CONTEXT 
Gilles de Rais was a 
fifteenth-century 
marshal of France 
and baron of 
Brittany who 
fought alongside 
Joan of Arc. His 
crimes in later life 
are said to have 
inspired the tale of 
Bluebeard. Found 
guilty of child 
abuse and multiple 
murders, Gilles de 
Rais was executed 
in 1440. Whatever 
the truth of the 
matter, the folk 
tale may be 
interpreted as a 
warning against 
the dangers of 
challenging the 
omnipotence of 
the aristocracy. 
v___/ 
The Bloody Chamber 19 

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
CONTEXT 
Justine ou les 
malheurs de la 
vertu (1791) was 
the first book to be 
published by the 
Marquis de Sade. 
The protagonist, 
a virtuous woman, 
recounts the 
extreme 
experiences of 
her life. The main 
ideas in this classic 
of erotic literature 
are that all moral 
standards are 
impositions on 
the liberty of the 
individual and that 
the conventional 
guardians of public 
morality are 
corrupt, hypocritical 
despots. 
\_/ 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 14-26 
• The Marquis leaves to attend to his business affairs, trusting 
the narrator with the keys to the entire castle. 
• He asks her to promise not to open the door to his private 
study. 
• The narrator contacts her mother by telephone, bursting into 
tears as she speaks of her luxurious surroundings. 
• Bored and curious, she searches the Marquis’s office and finds 
some information about his previous wives. 
• She decides to explore the rest of the house. 
A call from the Marquis’s agent interrupts their honeymoon; he is 
summoned on business and will be away some time. He gives his 
new bride a large bunch of keys to look after in his absence, holding 
back only one, which she demands greedily from him. He explains 
its significance to her: it is the key to his secret place, the only key 
she must not use. He explains that a piano-tuner will be arriving 
soon, and then he leaves. 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
The BBC Omnibus 
programme broadcast 
in September 1992, 
Angela Carter's 
Curious Room, was 
filmed in the last 
months before her 
death. Carter's life 
and work are 
examined in searching 
for her 'curious room'. 
For Carter, this is a 
metaphorical space 
where all the secrets 
of a person's life are 
stored before birth; 
life is the process of 
trying to find 'the 
curious room' and 
rediscover or 
remember those 
secrets. 
His wife resents being left alone, but entertains herself by playing 
the newly retuned piano. She enjoys bossing the servants around, 
but her lonely life of idleness is so strange that she finds herself 
suddenly weeping when speaking to her mother on the telephone. 
Taking the Marquis’s keys, she resolves to find out more about him. 
Searching through his papers in his office she comes across some 
intimate souvenirs of his previous wives. She is spurred on to find 
out more of the Marquis’s secrets and decides to use the forbidden 
key. She approaches the chamber through a silent corridor and, 
though she is not afraid, hesitates before opening the door. 
Commentary 
The narrator employs a detached tone in recalling the moment of 
consummation of their marriage. The earlier suggestion that she 
may have been excited by his aggressive sexuality gives way to a 
dulled list of moments revealing no hint of any pleasure on her part. 
Their physical relationship is a ‘one-sided struggle’ (p. 14); she hears 
20 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
rather than participates in the climax; her participation is recalled as 
if she were hardly present at all, being merely a passive victim of his 
desire. Her comment ‘I had bled’ (p. 14) suggests she has suffered 
the assault of his desire as a wounding experience, but it is 
presented entirely without emotional resonance or any sense 
of her feelings or pleasure. The Marquis takes possession of his 
property by ‘winning’ the virginity that she had so eagerly 
anticipated losing. The numbness of the narration here reflects the 
impact of selfish indulgence of male desire. It is possible that there is 
also a connection with the shocked ‘out of body’ accounts of rape, 
given by some victims, describing a kind of numbed detachment 
from the horror and pain of the experience. 
She is uncertain whether she knows the true identity of the Marquis 
or not after this dubious intimacy. The doubts she has about her 
husband reveal her disappointment and also hint at something more 
fearful in her attitude towards him. His ‘deathly composure’ is no 
more than a fragile ‘mask’ for his true nature, broken at the height 
of his ecstasy (p. 14). His pleasure, when she hears him ‘shriek and 
blaspheme’, is conveyed as something savage, mad and unholy. 
Carter is playing here with conventions and codes associated with 
love and marriage. If one takes the Christian view that marriage is a 
union sanctified by divine will, then sex may be seen as something 
sacred: a form of worship. The Marquis seems to be almost demonic 
in his passion, inverting or perverting the supposed natural order 
that the narrator seemed to expect. 
The ‘insolent incense’ of the lilies turns the bedroom into an 
‘embalming parlour’ (p. 14). Carter is constructing clues for the 
reader here in her choice of symbol and its development in the 
associations made by the narrator. The link between the marriage 
bed and death is unequivocally assuming greater prominence at 
this point in the story. This can be read at many different levels 
of meaning. Marriage (where traditionally the woman became the 
man’s property) can be seen metaphorically as the termination of 
a woman’s freedom of action, the end of independence, the death 
of the self and so on, expressing a loss of personal identity and 
mourning a loss of control over one’s destiny; or it can be 
interpreted more literally as being the direct or indirect cause of 
death for many women through domestic drudgery, domestic 
CONTEXT 
Marxism 
challenged the 
supposed moral 
sanctity of the 
bourgeois family: 
'Our bourgeois, 
not content with 
having wives and 
daughters of their 
proletarians at 
their disposal, 
not to speak 
of common 
prostitutes, take 
the greatest 
pleasure in 
seducing each 
other's wives' (Karl 
Marx and Friedrich 
Engels, The 
Communist 
Manifesto, 1848). 
V___/ 
The Bloody Chamber 21 

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 14-26 continued 
CONTEXT 
Friedrich Engels 
wrote in Ludwig 
Feuerbach and the 
End of Classical 
German 
Philosophy (1886): 
'the marriage laws 
... could all 
disappear 
tomorrow without 
changing in the 
slightest the 
practice of love 
and friendship'. 
\___/ 
CONTEXT 
The Symbolists 
were a loosely 
associated group 
of artists working 
between the 1880s 
and the first 
decade of the 
twentieth century. 
Poets and painters 
making use of 
myth and 
mysticism to 
explore their 
themes of death, 
dreams, sexuality 
and the occult are 
often identified 
with this term. 
v___ 
violence or the perils of childbirth. The long-held fear of these 
dangers is embedded in this story and echoes throughout the 
collection as a whole. 
As Carter moves the plot along with a telephone call, resuming the 
scene of the ‘honeymoon’ (p. 15) couple after the consummation of 
their marriage, the emphasis placed on the age difference between 
the man and the Tittle girl’ (p. 15) adds the unpleasant association of 
child abuse to our understanding of the relationship. Her awareness 
that she has been ‘bought with a handful of coloured stones and 
the pelts of dead beasts’ (p. 15) echoes the nineteenth-century 
socialist view that marriage was little more than a form of licensed 
prostitution. Although the narrator refers to her ‘wounded vanity’ 
(p. 15), it is clear that the experience for her of this new life of 
luxury is degrading and that, for all the wealth she has received, 
she has sold herself cheaply. In effect, she realises here that the 
distinction between the aristocratic wife and the common prostitute 
is only the haggling over the price of the commodity and that what 
she had to sell, her virginity, has been used up in one moment. The 
roots of the exaggerated value of virginity lie in the traditions of 
patriarchal society. The belief that disease and doubt over paternity 
could be avoided by ensuring the chastity and virtue of young 
women, preserving them for only one husband, is bound up with 
the history and development of social rituals of courtship and 
marriage. The Marquis reveals this to her ‘shock of surprise’ when 
he muses on how, ‘in these civilized times’, there will be no public 
display of the evidence of her changed status to his ‘interested 
tenants’ (p. 16). 
Carter builds on our earlier knowledge of this man as a connoisseur 
and collector of bourgeois cultural artefacts. The images of the 
paintings described are powerful depictions of women as victims, 
but the Marquis is attracted to them as much by the narrative of 
the creation of the images as by the images themselves. Carter 
creates a self-referential moment of intertextuality, entwining a real 
artist known for eroticised interpretations of literary themes, 
Gustave Moreau, and the nineteenth-century Symbolists, notorious 
for their exploration of themes of death, debauchery and perversion, 
with imaginary works of art of her own creation. 
22 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
At this stage, the narrator is uncertain of her own desire, as she is 
afraid that the Marquis may know something about her nature that 
she is reluctant to acknowledge. She refers to this as the ‘beastly 
truth’ that her ‘innocence’ conceals ‘a rare talent for corruption’ 
(p. 17). The way Carter has the Marquis providing her with all the 
keys except one is an expert mirroring of the relationship in symbolic 
form. His generosity and trust seem impressive, but the reservation of 
one secret adds to the mystery already built up around this character. 
The reader comes to know the character of the Marquis through the 
process of the revelation of his character to the narrator, but we are 
not limited by her naivety in our appraisal of his nature. 
The way in which the woman is allowed to possess the key - only 
on condition that she must not use it - is reminiscent of the biblical 
tale of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. It is quite easy to see 
the man as godlike here, providing a kind of paradise on earth, and 
placing limits on freedom to know the truth. It is easy to see the 
woman as Eve, according to one’s perspective, as either succumbing 
to temptation or resolutely pursuing knowledge. The status of the 
myth of man’s expulsion from paradise as a result of the invidious 
behaviour of woman is being challenged by this tale. Carter is 
playing with analogy as a narrative device in her tale, inviting the 
reader to consider the resonances of the situation without fastening 
her analogy to a strict structure or limit of meaning. It becomes 
obvious, whether the phone call to summon the Marquis away is 
genuine or not, that he is deliberately setting a test for his bride that 
he really hopes and expects her to fail. The Marquis has enticed his 
wife to disobey him, but the fact that she has been set up does not 
absolve her of responsibility: she chooses to disobey him for her 
own reasons. This is the crux of the matter in which the narrator 
becomes entangled. 
CONTEXT 
Eve's temptation 
by the serpent in 
the Garden of 
Eden is recounted 
in Chapter 3 of the 
Book of Genesis. -y 
The narrator is ambivalent about her attitude to her departed 
husband, longing for the man who disgusts her and acknowledging 
a ‘certain queasy craving’ for the ‘thousand, thousand baroque 
intersections of flesh upon flesh’ (p. 19). It is clear that, despite - or 
perhaps because of - not being sexually fulfilled by the Marquis, she 
is still enthralled by the possibility of sexual delight at which he has 
hinted. It is apparent that she has not understood that when he speaks 
of sexual pleasure, it is his feelings he is concerned with, not hers. 
The Bloody Chamber 23 

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
Pages 14-26 continued 
CONTEXT 
The notion of the 
'male gaze' is a 
central but 
contentious 
concept in feminist 
theory. Laura 
Mulvey's essay 
'Visual Pleasure 
and Narrative 
Cinema' (first 
published in 1975; 
later reprinted in 
her 1989 work 
Visual and Other 
Pleasures) was a 
deliberate and 
provocative 
feminist attack on 
patriarchal values 
in the visual 
media, particularly 
Hollywood. In it 
Mulvey argues that 
patriarchy regards 
the audience as 
men, and women 
are therefore 
obliged to adopt 
a masculine 
perspective when 
looking at images 
that represent 
women as objects 
for male 
satisfaction. 
v___ 
After a momentary, and ambiguous, ‘jealous scare’ (p. 20) when, 
with some ‘relief’, she imagines the Marquis in the arms of a 
more experienced mistress in New York, the narrator discovers 
the piano has now been tuned. This moment is a turning point 
in the narrative, as it is a representation of the young woman 
rediscovering herself as a precursor to discovering a more worthy 
male companion. She feels ‘far more at ease’ with herself in her 
old clothes, playing the piano, than in her new role. It is not at all 
accidental that Carter has this character relaxing into the ‘costume 
of a student’ (p. 20). The connotations of willingness to learn, 
relative innocence, potential ignorance and dedication to discovery 
are all pertinent to her situation. 
The piano-tuner is introduced as a complete opposite to the 
Marquis. The older man is cruel, voyeuristic and blasphemous; 
the young man is gentle, blind and trained in his trade by a ‘good 
priest’ (p. 20). If one considers the influence of the 1970s feminist 
discussion of the notion of the ‘male gaze’, the question of who 
can look at whom in this story is significant. The piano-tuner is 
prevented from looking at the woman in the way that the ‘normal’ 
sighted man sees her. His blindness is at once a symbol of his 
weakness and the possibility of a non-threatening relationship, one 
not based on selfish - primarily visual - gratification for the man 
alone. Whether or not this is more than recycling stereotypical 
gendered views of men as visually oriented and women as more 
tactile and oriented to the sense of touch is left open to question. 
The narrator’s childlike nature is displayed once more in her petty 
victory over the domestic staff. It is Carter’s way of reminding the 
reader that the narrator is not yet part of the adult world and still 
sees herself as a giggling schoolgirl. But the emptiness of her 
existence in the absence of her man is heightened by her realisation 
that she is isolated from human contact by her ‘new rank’ (p. 21). 
Carter deftly suggests that power structures are not solely 
determined by gender, and hints at the arbitrary, unsatisfactory and 
selfish nature of indisputable authority, ‘earned’ by the narrator 
through her marriage into the upper classes. Although ‘a little 
comforted’ after filling a few moments talking to her mother on 
the telephone, ‘the dead waste of time’ weighs heavily on her. 
Her immediate future is an ‘unimaginable desert’ (p. 21). 
24 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
Having reached this climax, if it can be called that, of boredom, the 
narrator rediscovers the portentous keys. The maid’s reproachful 
look suggests the maid is clearly aware, unlike her new mistress, 
that in this household it is entirely possible that someone might ‘set 
a trap’ (p. 22). The metaphor of lighting up the castle’s darkness 
goes hand in hand with the ‘exhilaration’ the young bride feels at 
the prospect of finding the Marquis’s ‘true nature’ (p. 22). 
Her suspicion, as she finds little to satisfy her curiosity, that there 
must be ‘a great deal to conceal if he takes such pains to hide it’ 
(p. 23) resonates with the reader’s own interest in her searches in the 
private office. We glean some hints that he is ruthless in business 
and possibly involved in the opium trade. His wife experiences the 
dubious thrill of discovering the Marquis’s former passions for 
other women when she finds the mementoes he has kept in his 
personal file. The keepsakes have a rather macabre impact, being 
expressions of submissive desire, fascination with death and 
ghoulish enjoyment of vampirism. ‘La Coupole’ (p. 24) was 
a dance hall in the Montparnasse district of Paris renowned for 
the intellectual and creative decadence of its bohemian clientele 
in the early part of the twentieth century. Carter is somewhat 
anachronistic in her use of this reference as, though Montparnasse 
enjoyed this bohemian reputation from the late nineteenth century, 
La Coupole was not established until 1927. The quotation from 
Baudelaire’s Journaux intimes (1887) - ‘the supreme and unique 
pleasure of love is the certainty that one is doing evil’ (in the 
original French: Ta volupte unique et supreme de l’amour git dans la 
certitude de faire le mal’) - inverts the normal association between 
goodness and love. Carter’s chosen name for the Romanian 
countess, Carmilla, recalls - in a somewhat contrived manner - 
an early and notorious literary example of the female vampire. 
The narrator naively realises her inexperience in matters such 
as these camp and sophisticated ‘grown-up games’ (p. 24). 
Carter makes it appear accidental or a chance occurrence that leads 
the narrator to the one key that she has been forbidden to use. 
While it may be superfluous to question the psychological veracity 
of characterisation in any of these tales, as character here is merely 
a vehicle for ideas rather than a depiction or description of reality, 
CHECK 
THE NET 
'Visual Pleasure and 
Narrative Cinema' 
was originally 
published in the 
British film theory 
periodical Screen 
(16:3, Autumn 1975); 
you can read 
Mulvey's essay 
online: type the 
author and the title 
into a search engine. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
'Carmilla', a story 
published in the 
collection In a Glass 
Darkly by Joseph 
Sheridan Le Fanu 
in 1872, is a short 
Gothic tale of 
vampirism. The 
lesbian theme has 
influenced much of 
the genre that has 
followed, including 
the work of Bram 
Stoker (1847-1912). 
The Bloody Chamber 25 

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 14-26 continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Jane Austen in 
Northanger Abbey 
(published in 1818) 
mocks the reader 
of Gothic tales. 
When one of her 
characters proposes 
a reading list that 
includes the titles 
'Castle of 
Wolfenbach, 
Clermont, 
Mysterious 
Warnings, 
Necromancer of 
the Black Forest, 
Midnight Bell, 
Orphan of 
the Rhine, and 
Horrid Mysteries', 
Austen's heroine 
enthusiastically 
responds: 'but are 
they all horrid, are 
you sure they are all 
horrid?' (Chapter 6). 
it seems particularly odd that the most obvious root to the 
discovery of hidden secrets has not been taken up to this point 
- particularly as she has been informed that it is the place where 
he goes ‘to savour the rare pleasure of imagining myself wifeless’ 
(p. 19). Where else would she be likely to discover his identity in its 
most separate and distinct form? The vision the narrator has of the 
Marquis as two separate identities - ‘his real self in his den ... had 
sent a moving figure of himself to New York’ (p. 25) - is not such a 
strange idea, though it is unusual to imagine the public and private 
personae being in different places at any one moment. 
As she journeys to the darkest core of the man’s castle to discover 
his inner identity, the narrator is not overwhelmed by fear or any 
consciousness of betraying her promise to the Marquis. The vivid 
description of the corridor is Gothic interior styling in narrative 
to perfection. An enclosed, dark space, lit only by flickering flame, 
creates a shadowy world of images of half-glimpsed abuse of 
women. The passage leads down beneath the castle and the notion 
of being underground creates obvious connotations of the 
mythological underworld of the dead or being buried alive 
in some tomb. Carter draws out the moment of discovery of the 
‘subterranean privacy’ (p. 26), allowing her narrator the obligatory 
pause of trepidation before turning the key in the lock. 
The break in the narrative at this point further prolongs the denial 
of the moment of discovery for the narrator and the reader. It also 
causes us to speculate on the nature of this hidden and mysterious 
room, not only in relation to what it might be within the tale at a 
surface or literal level of meaning, but also in relation to what a 
deeper reading of the story might reveal the room to represent in 
Carter’s inventive and original view of the world. 
QUESTION 
Why and how does 
Carter reinterpret 
Gothic conventions 
in these stories? 
GLOSSARY 
14 stertorously noisily, from the Latin stertere ('to snore') 
somnolent soporific or something that makes a person feel 
sleepy 
16 satyr in Greek mythology, part human, part animal beings 
associated with Dionysus, the god of wine, with a 
reputation for great sexual energy 
v_____ J 
26 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
GLOSSARY 
16 baroque a term used to describe architecture, particularly 
in the eighteenth century, that made use of odd, irregular 
shapes and grotesque features 
pellucid clear, shining or transparent 
19 vicuna very fine silky wool or cloth 
libertine derived from the Latin libertinus, 'freedman', it was 
applied to men, typically, who saw themselves as freethinkers 
and nonconformists; by the sixteenth century generally used 
in criticism of promiscuous and amoral conduct 
21 trousseau a bride's 'wardrobe' or personal collection of 
clothes and household goods 
24 Liebestod German for 'Love Death', 'Liebestod' is the title 
of an aria from Richard Wagner's opera Tristan und Isolde 
(first performed in 1865) 
Grand Guignol a sensational style of theatre, popular in 
France in the nineteenth century and early twentieth 
century, similar to melodrama 
25 viscera the internal parts of a body, especially the guts or 
the bowels 
■Hlq [The Bloody Chamber, pages 26-8 
• The narrator opens the door to the forbidden chamber, where 
she discovers the Marquis’s terrible secret collection. 
• The bodily remains of his previous wives form a macabre 
display in the Marquis’s private study. 
The narrator recounts what she sees when she enters the forbidden 
room, which it soon becomes clear has been used for acts of torture 
and murder. First she discovers the naked embalmed body of her 
husband’s first wife, an opera singer; next the skull of his second 
wife, a renowned beauty; and last but not least, trapped in the 
‘Iron Maiden’ (p. 28), the still bleeding body of his third wife, an 
aristocrat like himself. She realises with horror that the Marquis 
intends to add her to the collection. In her shock she drops the key 
and it becomes covered in blood. Retrieving the key, she runs away 
from the ‘bloody chamber’ (p. 35) at the heart of the castle. 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
In Peter Brook's 
Marat/Sade (1967), 
adapted from Peter 
Weiss's play The 
Persecution and 
Assassination of 
Jean-Paul Marat 
as Performed by 
the Inmates of 
the Asylum of 
Charenton under 
the Direction of the 
Marquis de Sade 
(1964), de Sade, 
imprisoned in 
Charenton, directs 
the other mental 
patients in a play 
based on the life of 
the revolutionary 
Jean-Paul Marat. 
The film is a study in 
chaos and madness, 
but is based on the 
reality of de Sade's 
life. 
The Bloody Chamber 27 

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
The Bloody.Chamber The text 
PAGES 26-8 continued 
QUESTION 
Characters in 
Gothic literature 
break accepted 
moral and social 
codes: is Carter, 
as a storyteller, a 
code-breaker or 
a code-maker? 
CONTEXT 
Matthew 27:24 
states: 'When 
Pilate saw that 
he could prevail 
nothing, but that 
rather a tumult 
was made, he took 
water, and washed 
his hands before 
the multitude, 
saying, I am 
innocent of the 
blood of this just 
person'. 
V _7 
Commentary 
Carter begins the section on the discovery of the chamber with 
another quotation from Baudelaire equating love with torture, with 
the narrator referring back to her brief ‘honeymoon’ experience to 
confirm the point. The identification of love and sex with death here 
is very strong, with Carter clearly utilising the ideas of horror 
evoked by ‘mutilation’ and ‘annihilation’ (p. 26). While it is 
unequivocally a picture of torture and murderous abuse of women, 
Carter also includes some suggestions that are far more disquieting 
than mere violence. The narrator is shocked to see evidence that the 
victims colluded with the murderer: the way the ‘dead lips smiled’ 
(p. 27), suggesting the opera singer enjoyed being strangled, is a 
particularly disturbing image. The narrator is similarly captivated 
by the deathly beauty of the celebrated painter’s model, 
recognisable even as a severed skull. The most gruesome discovery 
is that of the countess, who enjoyed a dangerous flirtation with 
death, penetrated by multiple spikes. The association with the 
earlier impaling of his new bride is hard to overlook, even if it is not 
spelled out by Carter. 
The moment of the narrator’s realisation that she is the next 
addition to this grisly collection is heightened by the attention 
drawn to the opal ring, worn by all his previous wives. The 
connection Carter allows the narrator to make here between the 
Marquis and God, as identical omniscient presences seeing her 
trespassing at this very moment, captures her vulnerability and her 
guilt. The section closes with a resonant Gothic touch as she slams 
the ‘door of hell’ behind her (p. 28). It is possible here to elaborate 
from the depiction of this place as ‘hell’, and her consciousness that 
this place is the destiny ordained for her by the Marquis, to the 
sense that the narrator now sees herself as a sinner in need of 
salvation. Though this is not explicitly stated by the narrator herself, 
the ideas of shame and redemption are significantly highlighted at 
the end of the story. The narrator’s need ‘to keep my hands clean’ 
(p. 28) recalls Pontius Pilate, who, as the Roman governor of 
Judaea, was responsible for the execution of Jesus Christ but, 
according to the New Testament, symbolically washed his hands 
to reject any personal guilt. 
It becomes possible at this point to examine what the ‘bloody 
chamber’ (p. 35) might represent at a symbolic level in this tale. 
28 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
Carter has been referencing the Symbolist school of art and poetry, 
as well as making conscious use of literary symbolism herself 
throughout the tale, so it is not unreasonable to consider what 
the chamber might or might not refer to as a symbol. It could be 
taken, at one level, as the murderous heart of man, inimical and 
hostile to women, a place where dark desires are entombed and sex 
and death are aligned. It is a logical extension of the argument that 
men wish to possess women utterly. This has been prefaced by the 
note from the wife earlier: ‘My darling, I cannot wait for the 
moment when you may make me yours completely’ (p. 24). To take 
a life is the ultimate act of power over another human being, and the 
suggestion here is that death is the ultimate form of submission. 
These are dark and disturbing ideas - not least because the victim’s 
compliance with her aggressor does not excuse the act of abuse. 
At another level, the ‘bloody chamber’ may be viewed as a symbol 
of female identity, or even the womb itself, a wider metaphor of the 
female embodiment of life. This is a more complex idea that needs 
some careful thought. In entering the chamber, the woman is 
coming to know her fate as a woman through seeing the fate of 
other women. Some commentators view this as a distorted form of 
the fear of maternity associated with the content of traditional fairy 
tales. As this fear is based on the very real history of the dangers 
involved in bearing children - specifically the possibility of death 
in childbirth - there is some point to giving consideration to the 
collection of tales, as an unwieldy but partially coherent whole, with 
this association in mind. It is a good idea, while reading The Bloody 
Chamber, to keep in mind Carter’s view that this is not a collection 
of fairy tales but a collection of stories about fairy tales. 
CONTEXT 
Charles Baudelaire, 
Arthur Rimbaud 
and Paul Verlaine 
are among the 
most noted 
Symbolist poets; 
Gustave Moreau, 
Gustav Klimt and 
Edvard Munch are 
some of the most 
noted Symbolist 
painters. 
v_/ 
GLOSSARY 
26 sacerdotal related to the sacred duties of priests, connected 
with the idea of sacrifice 
27 catafalque a wooden structure suggesting a tomb or 
monument, used in funeral ceremonies to support a coffin 
bier stretcher that bears the corpse to the grave or where a 
body rests before burial 
28 rictus open-mouthed - often implying a fixed or set 
grimace or grin associated with death 
v___—- 
The Bloody Chamber 29 

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
The Bloody Chamber, pages 28-42 
• As the wife dreads the return of the Marquis, she is comforted 
by the blind young piano-tuner, Jean-Yves. 
• The Marquis returns and prepares to carry out his murderous 
plan. 
• She is rescued from her villainous husband by the timely and 
heroic arrival of her mother, who shoots him dead. 
• Now a wealthy widow, the narrator and the piano-tuner begin 
a new life together. 
The narrator takes refuge in her music room as she considers the 
possibilities of assistance. She decides she cannot trust the staff 
or local officials. She discovers the telephone has been cut off, 
but remains calm because she believes the Marquis has left the 
country and so she therefore has some time to work out what to 
do. She plays the piano for consolation and the blind piano-tuner 
listens. When they talk she faints. He takes care of her and she 
reveals her predicament; in response he informs her of the castle’s 
history of murder. 
QUESTION 
Despite the 
female- 
empowering role 
reversals apparent 
in some of the 
stories, why do 
the most potent 
sources of interest 
and energy in The 
Bloody Chamber 
seem to come from 
its series of 
ferocious, exciting 
and often morally 
despicable male 
characters? 
The moment is interrupted by the sudden return of the Marquis. 
She dismisses the young man and faces the Marquis alone. He 
demands the keys, and her broken promise to him is revealed. 
The mark of the blood on the key stains her forehead. He cruelly 
instructs her to prepare for her execution as if it is a ritual sacrifice. 
The young man comforts the narrator in her music room. As she is 
summoned to the castle courtyard by the Marquis, she sees a ‘crazy, 
magnificent horsewoman’ (p. 38) riding towards the castle. The 
young man and the woman go to the courtyard and are taunted 
by the Marquis as he prepares to kill them. Carter draws out the 
moment of climax, with the Marquis lifting up the sword, the 
narrator’s head placed on the stone, and the fatal blow being 
interrupted by the noisy arrival of the ‘wild thing’ (p. 40) that is her 
mother. At the last possible moment, the narrator’s mother shoots 
the Marquis dead, and they are saved. 
30 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
! 
The text The Bloody Chamber 
The young lovers set up a new home in Paris with her mother, 
turning the wealth of the Marquis to good use. The narrator 
explains the extraordinary power of ‘maternal telepathy’ (p. 41) 
that prompted her mother to come to her rescue. She still bears the 
mark of her shame, but her lover cannot see it. 
Commentary 
The first thing that the narrator encounters as she tries to escape the 
horrors of the chamber, and her own imminent demise, is a picture 
of Saint Cecilia, the Christian martyr and patron saint of musicians 
and poets. It is Carter’s teasing sense of humour that keeps the 
narrator ignorant of her story: Cecilia was beheaded. The narrator 
very quickly becomes aware of how the Marquis’s power may well 
extend beyond the walls of the castle to prevent her escape. She has 
not only journeyed far from her Parisian home, but also has 
metaphorically travelled far back in time to an almost medieval or 
feudal society that owes its allegiance not to any concept of truth or 
justice and exists only to serve the whims of a capricious master. 
Even by the standards of the decadent French society of the 
nineteenth century, the Marquis’s control of his local region is 
extraordinary. Carter introduces the idea of symbolic protection 
from evil here, as the narrator tries to create through the magic 
of her music a ‘pentacle’ (p. 30). This image recurs in many of 
the stories. A pentacle is a pagan symbol, a five-pointed star or 
pentagram drawn within a circle, used for a variety of purposes in 
pagan rites. The piece she chooses to play is a symbolic retreat into 
her childhood, as the first part of ‘The Well-Tempered, Clavier by 
Bach would have been something she learned and practised at an 
early stage of her musical studies. 
Of course, in one sense, the charm she weaves in her music does 
bring her protection of a kind with the arrival of the young, blind 
piano-tuner, who is drawn to the sound of her playing. His gentle 
manner, the antithesis of the Marquis’s cruelty, provokes a far 
greater reaction in her. In a coyly romantic interlude, she faints and 
regains consciousness in the piano-tuner’s arms. Her companion is 
identified with the natural order of the world; he is a natural man, 
speaking with the ‘rhythms’ (p. 31) of the land and the sea. It is a 
suggestion of a possible harmony between them in keeping with 
CONTEXT 
Feudal lords 
required elite 
vassals to serve as 
warriors in return 
for certain rights 
and protections. 
Serfs and peasants 
were obliged to 
serve vassals and 
lords by working 
the land. Serfs 
were little more 
than slaves, 
though there 
were distinctions 
in the rights and 
responsibilities of 
even the lowest 
peasantry. The lord 
of the manor held 
his position from 
the king and, 
though nominally 
obliged to protect 
his people, ruled 
with absolute 
authority in his 
own domain. 
CONTEXT 
A pentangle is seen 
as a symbol of 
protection in British 
folklore. Jacqueline 
Simpson and Steve 
Roud state that it 
'was reinterpreted 
in Christian terms as 
an emblem of the 
Five Wounds of 
Jesus, guaranteed 
to put demons to 
flight' (A Dictionary 
of English Folklore, 
2000). 
v _/ 
The Bloody Chamber 31 

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 28-42 continued 
CONTEXT 
Androgyny is a 
term derived from 
the Greek words 
for man and 
woman and is a 
common theme in 
literature dealing 
with gender issues. 
Jean-Yves is, to 
some extent, 
androgynous in 
that he is a man 
without the more 
threatening 
aspects of typical 
masculine traits, 
and exhibits more 
typically feminine 
virtues: tolerance, 
musicality, 
tenderness, 
courage and 
submissiveness. 
\___/ 
their common love of music. Even his name, Jean-Yves, is strangely 
unmasculine to English-speaking readers, in the way it resembles 
the female name Eve in pronunciation and visually recalls the 
English female name Jean, despite being a common French male 
name. This is as significant as the fact that he is the only character 
in this story to be given a first name. 
As they share confidences, hers of the inner secrets of the castle 
and his of the secrets of the castle’s history, the reader realises the 
Marquis is re-enacting the murderous traditions of his ancestors. 
This is Carter’s way of making it harder to present the murderer 
as some kind of individual madman. This sadist is an inheritor of 
a long tradition of misogynistic crimes. The romantic interlude 
is brought abruptly to an end by the sudden appearance of the 
Marquis’s car, personified as a beastly monster ‘gouging’ (p. 32) its 
way through the predawn mist. The narrator tries in vain to 
remove the evidence of her guilt: the bloodstain on the key. This is a 
neat inversion of the earlier reference to the medieval tradition of a 
bloodstain being a sign of virtue and innocence (pp. 15-16). Blood 
takes on here another, more ominous, association with guilt and sin 
as evidence of wrong doing. 
The Marquis’s presence is again announced by her sense of smell: 
his ‘pungent aroma’ (p. 33) is the first sign of his arrival in the 
bedroom. The married couple now begin a charade of deceitful 
pretence. The Marquis is merely waiting to find out if she has yet 
fallen into the trap he has set; the narrator is trying to prevent him 
discovering her ‘new knowledge’ (p. 34). She cannot bear his 
‘intimate touch’, as it is now associated with the reality of the 
tortured wives in the chamber. The Marquis demands the return 
of his keys and insists on her obedience, resisting her attempts to 
seduce him into delay. Her sudden consciousness that she is dealing 
with a man who is in a state of complete and overwhelming ‘despair’ 
does little to help the reader understand why she feels pity for the 
‘atrocious loneliness of that monster!’ (p. 35). Immediately, the 
Marquis shows signs of conflicting emotions - excitement, shame, 
guilt, joy - as he understands she has ‘sinned’ (p. 36). Carter’s 
use of the oxymorons ‘sombre delirium’ (p. 35) and ‘guilty joy’ 
(p. 36) encapsulates the contradictory shifts and changes in 
his mood. 
32 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
Another strange, and more striking, use of ‘magic’ by Carter has the 
stain on the key transferring to the woman’s forehead in a bizarre 
ritual where she kneels obediently before the Marquis. The mark 
is ‘heart-shaped’ and reminds her of ‘the caste mark of a brahmin 
woman’ in India (p. 36). This is the priestly caste; it is possible that 
Carter is hinting at some form of possible enlightenment through 
experience for her narrator here, and so the connotation of the stain 
might not be as negative as the story seems to suggest. The early clues 
to her fate - the references to the decapitation of aristocrats in the 
French Revolution, the visual effect of the blood-red ruby choker 
around her neck, the picture of Saint Cecilia - are all now confirmed 
as the Marquis instructs her to prepare for the ‘last rites’ (p. 36). 
The powerless young man stays to comfort her when all the other 
servants leave. His attitude is rather less than comforting, though: 
first he tells her she does not deserve her fate; then he reminds her 
that she disobeyed her husband and that is the reason for her 
punishment. His logic leads him to dismiss her plea ‘I only did what 
he knew I would’ by asserting her connection to the mythological 
guilty female: ‘Like Eve’ (p. 38). Yet he does not desert her; he is 
willing to share her fate. This makes an almost exact analogy 
between Jean-Yves and the biblical Adam, who had to share Eve’s 
punishment. It is a moot point which character in which tale has the 
most scope for exercising free will in the matter of sharing another’s 
fate. Yet the girl refers to him as ‘My lover’ (p. 38), a recognition 
and declaration of the mutual bond between them. 
The Marquis is dressed in clothes that epitomise the height of 
masculine sartorial elegance. The reference to the London tailors 
and shirt makers is an example of Carter’s attention to detail and 
awareness of how name-dropping a luxury item can communicate 
in shorthand a wealth of information about a character’s attitudes 
and values. The sword he intends to use is given an intriguing 
history: it has been ceremonially presented to Napoleon Bonaparte, 
‘the little corporal’ (p. 39), by one of the Marquis’s ancestors, three 
generations ago, at the end of the eighteenth century. The story is 
briefly told of his family’s defeat, humiliation and suicide. The 
sword is thus associated with death and military dictatorship. In one 
sentence, Carter has demonstrated how the economy of the short 
story as a narrative form leads a writer to communicate more 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Nathaniel 
Hawthorne's novel 
The Scarlet Letter 
(1850) makes use of 
marks of shame in a 
similarly ambiguous 
and subversive 
manner. 
CONTEXT 
The Marquis de 
Sade managed, 
despite his 
aristocratic birth, 
not only to survive 
the French 
Revolution but 
also to play some 
part in the 
administration 
of the Republic 
as Citizen Sade. 
His cynical and 
opportunist view 
of life, his capacity 
for theatrical 
display, and quirks 
of fate enabled 
him to survive 
in times when 
many of his 
contemporaries 
were executed. 
v _ 
The Bloody Chamber 33 

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 28-42 continued 
CONTEXT 
Pregnancy and 
childbirth 
historically posed 
high risks to the 
mother. At the 
beginning of the 
twentieth century, 
one in every 
hundred mothers 
would die giving 
birth to their child. 
In developed 
countries today 
that risk has been 
reduced to one 
in every ten 
thousand. 
\___/ 
CONTEXT 
The Marquis's 
stubborn headlong 
attack on the 
better armed 
mother (who 
literally outguns 
him) mocks the 
macho tradition 
of the tragic hero, 
as typified 
by Macbeth's 
insistence on 
fighting to the 
bitter end in 
Shakespeare's 1606 
play Macbeth. v _ 
through implication and inference. It is no coincidence that her 
choice of simile for this weapon, ‘sharp as childbirth’ (p. 39), raises 
the theme of maternal mortality. 
The Marquis’s despair is shown to be a fear of female sexuality 
when he taunts the blind man for being ‘besotted’ (p. 39). The 
suspicion that she was not ‘truly blind to her own desires’ is both 
the fantasy and the fear of the misogynist. The sight of another man 
supporting his wife makes the Marquis repudiate her as a ‘whore’ 
(p. 39). It was, after all, the Marquis who bought her with the opal 
ring in the first place; so it seems perverse that he should resent her 
for being what he has always thought her to be, underneath the 
trappings of culture and wealth that disguise the bargain he made. 
Carter’s point is that sadism creates a pathetic and empty notion 
of male sexuality which would be merely ridiculous if it were not 
so dangerous for women. 
It is as the narrator is summoned to the place of execution that the 
miraculous hope of rescue appears in the distance. The obvious clue 
to the identity of Carter’s deus ex machina plot device (derived 
from the tradition of Greek tragedy where hopeless situations are 
resolved by the sudden arrival of the gods) is the fact that she is 
dressed in ‘widow’s weeds’ (p. 38). The improbable arrival of the 
narrator’s mother in the nick of time is contrived, but is entirely 
apt for the narrative style of the fairy tale. Of course, it is at first 
uncertain whether this rescuer will arrive in time. The tale is 
building towards its last climax. 
The place of execution now weirdly echoes the earlier scene of the 
consummation of the marriage. The Marquis is twisting her hair 
into a rope and kissing the nape of her neck; she is naked apart from 
her jewellery. The violence prefigured in the earlier scene is now 
brought to the fore in this macabre ritual. But ‘the beast’ (p. 40) is 
interrupted at the very moment of preying upon his victim. The 
male loses control in the face of a challenge from the ‘wild thing’ 
that is her mother. The ‘puppet master’, ‘the king’, is amazed that 
he is no longer in command of people and things. He is frozen as 
if in ‘clockwork tableaux’ (p. 40). Carter makes the only direct 
connection between the Marquis and the fairy-tale villain Bluebeard 
at this point. As he makes a ‘death or glory’ charge at the rebellious 
34 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
The text The Bloody Chamber 
objects who have failed to conform to his plan, the mother calmly 
shoots him dead (p. 41). Again, Carter makes a neat allusion to 
the dangerous and animalistic nature of the Marquis by briefly 
mentioning the mother’s youthful ability to eliminate the threat of a 
‘man-eating tiger’ (p. 41). She ‘disposed’ of the danger in each case, 
and the mother’s attitude is clear: when confronted by deadly 
beasts, kill without hesitation. The character is a feminist 
reinvention of the hero as a maternal icon. She resists and she 
triumphs, her ‘single, irreproachable bullet’ (p. 41) showing a 
remarkable economy of effort as well as moral superiority. All that 
is required now is the epilogue or the ‘happily ever after’ moment 
to draw this tale to a satisfying conclusion. 
It is not so strange that, after the adventures of their youth, the 
mother and daughter take to the ‘quiet life’ (p. 41). It is a model 
of domestic harmony based on public service, education, cultural 
endeavour, modest personal ambition and redistribution of wealth. 
The explanation of the mother’s motivation to spring to her 
daughter’s rescue is material enough as her actions were based on 
her knowledge of her daughter and human behaviour. The term 
‘maternal telepathy’ (p. 41) is coyly introduced by the narrator to 
avoid the despised cliche of ‘female intuition’ (though whether the 
notion of mothers being endowed with psychic powers is any 
more valid in gender politics is debatable). The story ends with a 
very downbeat turn of phrase, as the narrator reflects on the mark 
she still bears of her experience. It is not just that she is ashamed 
of being tricked or trapped by the Marquis into being his victim; 
it is that she is aware she was not a completely unwilling victim 
of his desires. 
The suggestion that victims of abuse, in some way, are complicit in 
their role makes this tale somewhat controversial. Carter explicitly 
rejects the notion of women as victims of patriarchy as merely a 
revised form of the passive role adopted by women under the 
influence of patriarchal conventions. Carter believed traditional 
fairy-tale morality could be summed up as: ‘Let’s not bother our 
heads with the mysteries of sado-masochistic attraction. We must 
learn to cope with the world before we can interpret it.’ She wrote 
these mocking words in her introduction to a new edition of 
Charles Perrault’s fairy tales in 1977. It is evident that she has 
CONTEXT 
A strong woman 
who possesses 
the gendered 
behaviours usually 
expected of men is 
often described as 
an Amazon. In 
Greek mythology, 
the Amazons were 
a tribe of warrior 
women said to live 
without men. A 
widespread belief 
persists that they 
cut off their right 
breast in order to 
be able to use their 
weapons more 
effectively, but this 
is not reflected in 
the early artistic 
depictions of the 
women. This may 
be a later element 
introduced to 
suggest that 
adopting 
supposedly 
masculine traits 
disfigures women 
and makes them 
'unnatural'. V___/ 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Perrault's book of 
fairy tales, Histoires 
ou contes du temps 
passe (1697), was 
translated by Angela 
Carter as The Fairy 
Tales of Charles 
Perrault in 1977. In 
her preface Carter 
describes Perrault as 
'humane, tolerant 
and kind-hearted'. 
The Bloody Chamber 35 

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
The Bloody Chamber The text 
PAGES 28^2 continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Karl Marx's Theses 
on Feuerbach 
(written in 1845) 
famously 
encapsulates 
the problems of 
philosophy in the 
real world: The 
philosophers have 
only interpreted the 
world, in various 
ways; the point is to 
change it.' 
CONTEXT 
Feminist revisions 
of the Greek myth 
of Medusa 
emphasise the 
Gorgon's beauty 
rather than her 
monstrosity, 
recasting her as a 
victim of male 
aggression. 
V_/ 
turned that attitude on its head in this tale. In grafting the forms of 
erotic literature onto the root stock of fairy tale, taking her model 
from female archetypes of female passivity and aggressive male 
sexuality created by the Marquis de Sade, Carter clearly wants to 
confront her readers with the mysteries avoided by other 
interpretations of fairy tales. It is also evident Carter believes it is 
necessary to interpret the world in order to learn to cope with it. 
GLOSSARY 
35 chthonic something that lives in the ground or beneath it 
37 vassal an underling, servant or slave 
40 Medusa in Greek mythology, a monstrous female Gorgon 
with writhing serpents for hair and a gaze capable of 
turning a person to stone. She was defeated by Perseus, 
who cut off her head. In some versions of the myth. 
Medusa's severed head retains its lethal power 
[ The Courtship of Mr Lyon 
• A poor man on his way home to his daughter is stranded 
when his car becomes stuck. 
• He finds help in the house of the Beast but offends his host 
by taking a rose for his beautiful daughter. 
• The daughter is obliged to stay with the Beast while he helps 
her father. 
• She leaves the Beast to be with her father and enjoy their new 
wealth, promising to return before the winter is over. 
• She neglects her promise and the Beast almost dies as a result. 
• She returns and the Beast is transformed by her kiss. 
A girl worries about her father’s safe return through the snow. 
In fact, her father’s car is stuck and he is a ruined man, unable to 
provide for his daughter. He abandons his car and walks through 
the snow, coming upon a mansion as night is falling. The place is 
strange - he finds food and drink but no inhabitants. His good 
fortune continues when he discovers the local garage will repair his 
36 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
* 
The text The Courtship of Mr Lyon 
car at his unknown host’s expense. As he makes his exit, he sees a 
rose in the garden and is reminded of his promise to bring one back 
for his daughter, and plucks it for her. A great beast, like a lion but 
dressed in human clothes, appears and challenges the man over the 
theft from his garden. The man explains it is for his daughter and 
the Beast’s angry mood changes when he sees her photograph. The 
man has little option but to return with his daughter as instructed 
by the Beast. They share a meal together and her father leaves her 
with the Beast when he goes back to London to take care of his 
business affairs. 
The Beast and the girl share an odd shyness when in each other’s 
company. She becomes less afraid of him, though his habit of licking 
her hands each night makes her nervous. When her father calls her 
away with news of his good fortune, she promises she will return; 
but her father treats her to a life of luxury and she forgets the Beast. 
She notices how the new life is changing her appearance. The Beast’s 
companion, a spaniel, finds her and leads her back to the Beast, who 
is dying. Having lost the will to hunt and kill other animals, the 
Beast is starving to death. The girl kisses him and the Beast is 
transformed from a lion into a man. The ending of the story 
suggests that they grow old together. 
Commentary 
This revision of ‘Beauty and the Beast’ is the most conventional 
updating of a traditional tale in the collection. The tale begins with 
the ‘lovely girl’ working in the ‘mean kitchen’ (p. 43), worrying for 
her father’s safety. The winter landscape and the isolation of the girl 
are gathered into one image as if she were ‘made all of snow’ that 
resembles ‘bridal satin’. The associations of whiteness, purity and 
virginity inform us of this character’s status. The character retains 
the name Beauty and her youth is emphasised by the fact that her 
father regards her as ‘his girl-child’ (p. 43). The opening of the tale 
looks ahead and hints at the ending of the story which, as in most 
fairy-tale happy endings, features the ideal of matrimonial harmony. 
Her father is an incompetent businessman, twice ruined and now 
bankrupt, blaming his vehicle for being stuck in the snow. His 
chance discovery of a magical mansion that provides for all his 
needs, apparently without anyone at home, does not alarm him. 
;CHECK 
THE FILM 
Jean Cocteau's 
La Belle et la bete 
(1946), a version 
of 'Beauty and the 
Beast', made in 
black and white, 
achieves many 
surreal effects and 
has a magical and 
enchanting style 
that influenced later 
adaptations. 
The Bloody Chamber 37 

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
The Courtship of Mr Lyon The text 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Alice's Adventures 
in Wonderland 
(1865) and its sequel 
Through the 
Looking-Glass and 
What Alice Found 
There (1871) by 
Charles Dodgson 
(1832-98) under 
the pseudonym 
Lewis Carroll are 
considered classics 
of children's 
literature. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Tess Cosslett's 
Talking Animals in 
British Children's 
Fiction, 1786-1914 
(2006) considers 
anthropomorphism 
in relation to 
attitudes to 
children's literature 
in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth 
centuries. 
It is this level of wealth he aspires to, and he understands that the 
privileges of this wealth include the ‘suspension of reality’ (p. 44) - a 
distancing from the mundane concerns of ordinary living. Carter is 
making a political point here within the magical aspects of her tale; 
the rich are not bound by the ‘laws of the world’ that apply to the 
less fortunate (p. 44). The labels on the food and drink provided, 
in anticipation of visitors, are taken directly from Lewis Carroll’s 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. It is almost disappointing that 
the man remains the same size and the dog does not start to talk 
to him. It seems odd that the dog, ‘man’s best friend’, does not 
undergo some kind of anthropomorphic transformation given the 
number of such changes in the collection as a whole. But Carter is 
mostly interested in the independence of spirit associated with cats, 
rather than the more manageable behaviour of dogs, as the vehicle 
for her exploration of natural desires and energies. This explains 
why the dog, at the end of this tale, remains a dog. 
As the man leaves the house, chance events reveal ‘one last, single, 
perfect rose’ (p. 46), which he takes to fulfil his daughter’s wish. 
The connection between the girl and the rose as symbolic images of 
perfection and simple innocence is made succinctly by this action. The 
‘leonine apparition’, part man, part lion, that seizes hold of him Tike an 
angry child’ is none other than the Beast of the fairy tale (p. 46), and 
the mere image of Beauty’s perfection is enough to calm the savage 
nature of the Beast. If readers are anticipating an obvious feminist 
perspective on the part of the writer in the retelling of this tale, 
they will most likely be disappointed: so far, so conventional. The 
traditional characters are less distant from us in manners and dress, but 
they are conforming to the pattern of the tale as we know it of old. 
Dutiful Beauty, ‘possessed by a sense of obligation to an unusual 
degree’ (p. 48), is obedient to her father and to the Beast throughout 
this story. When she neglects that duty, her good looks are spoiled. 
She is no longer the perfect woman. One has to consider exactly 
how ironic Carter is being in offering this version of the story to the 
reader - particularly when she warns the reader against judging her 
character: ‘Do not think she had no will of her own’ (p. 48). But it 
does seem that her options, such as they are, leave her little to choose 
between the idle ‘enchantment’ (p. 50) of the Beast’s domain and the 
‘high living and compliments’ (p. 52) of her father’s new riches. 
Beauty’s return to the Beast is the traditional race to save the dying 
38 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
f 
The text The Courtship of Mr Lyon 
lover by the guilty party. Beauty has neglected her duty and must 
atone for that fact. The rather pathetic humiliation of the Beast by his 
own loneliness is swiftly erased by her renewed love. There seems to 
be a rather mocking edge to Carter’s depiction of the man recovering 
from a near-death experience. 
In many ways, this is the least satisfying story of the collection. 
It is engaging enough in the way it is told, and the familiarity of 
the narrative path is not without its own entertainments, but the 
mythic properties of the tale are not subverted by Carter at all. This 
is perhaps the most disturbing aspect of Carter’s tale, and perhaps 
that is its value: in the new form the reader has to question the 
values embedded in such a story. In ‘Beauty and the Beast’ the 
romantic sentiment that the bestial nature of man is tamed and 
humanised by the submissive sacrifice of woman can be viewed as 
a rather masochistic notion. Beauty chooses to be with the Beast, 
but ends up only with the man she has to release from within the 
Beast. But there is perhaps a moral for our times that arises from 
this retelling: people need to recognise that they cannot always have 
what they want. Their life together is depicted as a ‘walk in the 
garden’ (p. 55), an allusion to the Garden of Eden and associated 
meanings of paradise regained and redemption; but the image of 
happiness also suggests an acceptance of nature’s imperfection: 
Mr and Mrs Lyon can enjoy the snowlike ‘drift of fallen petals’. 
GLOSSARY 
43 pallor indicates an unnatural loss of colour; often applied 
to human features as a sign of ill health or death 
44 Palladian Andrea Palladio (1518-80) was an Italian 
architect who imitated ancient Roman design. The Palladian 
style became popular in eighteenth-century England 
through the work of Inigo Jones (1573-1652) 
45 squirearchal an adjective suggesting the self-importance of 
the minor landowning country gentry or squires 
impecunious having little or no money, derived from the 
Latin pecunia ('money') 
47 Queen Anne a decorative style of furnishing and 
architecture from the early eighteenth century 
49 Apocalypse the Christian biblical idea of the end of the 
world and the revelation of God's will to humanity - the idea 
of the Beast in apocalyptic terms is a synonym for the devil 
V_____/ 
CONTEXT 
Although the story 
of a beautiful girl 
loving or marrying 
a monster has many 
origins and 
variations (for 
example Titania 
falling in love 
with Bottom in 
Shakespeare's 1595 
play A Midsummer 
Night's Dream), 
French author 
Gabrielle-Suzanne 
Barbot de 
Villeneuve 
(c. 1695-1755) is 
considered to be 
the original author 
of 'Beauty and the 
Beast'; her novella 
was published in 
1740. In 1756 this 
was radically 
abridged by 
Jeanne-Marie 
Leprince de 
Beaumont 
(1711-80); this 
shorter tale is the 
version we are most 
familiar with today. 
\_ 
The Bloody Chamber 39 

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
The Tiger’s Bride The text 
r-- 
The Tiger’s Bride 
—-----— 
CONTEXT 
Maria 
Alexandrovna, 
wife of Tsar 
Alexander II, is 
said to have 
initiated the late 
nineteenth-century 
fashion for the 
Russian aristocracy 
to spend their 
winters in the 
sunnier climes of 
the Italian Riviera. 
V___ 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Walt Disney's 
Snow White and 
the Seven Dwarfs 
(1937), based on 
the fairy tale by the 
Brothers Grimm, is 
one of the first and 
most successful 
feature-length 
animated films. 
Pinocchio (1940), 
Cinderella (1950) 
Sleeping Beauty 
(1959), The Little 
Mermaid (1989) 
and Beauty and the 
Beast (1991) are all 
taken from the 
European fairy-tale 
tradition. 
• A father loses his daughter to The Beast in a game of cards. 
• The young woman is taken to an isolated mansion where she 
resists The Beast’s voyeuristic requests. 
• He reveals himself to her as an animal. 
• She decides to be with him and also changes into a beautiful 
animal. 
In an unnamed city, not so far from Milan but more probably in 
Tuscany (from the references to the dialect on pp. 57 and 65), an 
impoverished and avaricious Russian nobleman gambles with his 
daughter’s life. Having enjoyed the luxury of warmer foreign 
climates, they have found themselves driven further south by 
the approaching winter. Her father is a drunken, womanising 
spendthrift who has worn out her mother with his reckless habits 
and is now busy doing the same to her. The family fortune is being 
lost at the turn of a card. The feudal lord taking advantage of his 
foolishness is known as The Beast, who is masked and disguised. 
Soon the father has lost everything but the girl, and he is prepared 
to stake her life for the hope of success. He loses and becomes quite 
changed. The Beast chastises his lack of care. 
The girl is taken next morning by The Beast’s valet. As she travels 
by carriage to the distant castle she reflects on the mystery of The 
Beast, recalling childhood stories. In a private room high above the 
rest of the house, The Beast’s desires are communicated to her by 
his valet. He offers to repay her father and reward her well for 
showing herself to him naked. She laughs and mocks the incivility 
of his request with a false acceptance that causes The Beast to shed 
a tear. She is taken to her own room, where she is waited upon by 
a clockwork servant. She is presented the next morning with an 
earring in the shape of a teardrop, which she refuses to accept. 
When asked a second time to agree to The Beast’s demands, she 
remains silent. Another tear falls from The Beast. 
Next morning, another teardrop earring is presented to her and 
again refused. Her own riding clothes are brought for her to go out 
hunting on horseback with The Beast. They ride together until he 
40 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
The text The Tiger’s Bride 
insists that she must see him without his disguising garments. She is 
profoundly moved by the sight of him in animal form and exposes 
her naked body to his sight. They return to the castle, clothed again. 
Through a magic mirror she sees her father is now wealthy again: 
The Beast has kept his word. She decides not to leave the castle, 
sending the clockwork servant to take her place in her father’s life. 
She strips again but chooses to wear the earrings to approach The 
Beast. The valet, now in the shape of a monkey, shows her into the 
room. The earrings turn back to water as The Beast licks her human 
flesh away to reveal the animal fur beneath. 
Commentary 
The tone of this version of ‘Beauty and the Beast’ is in complete 
contrast to the previous tale, as if Carter is somehow acknowledging 
the unsatisfactory nature of her other attempt at reworking the 
myth into a new form (see Detailed summaries: The Courtship of 
Mr Lyon). The narration is given this time to Beauty, and the reader 
immediately feels a sense that this is her story. She is not an idealised 
image of perfection. In this relationship, the daughter is attempting 
to cope with an inadequate father not from a sense of obligation but 
from the perspective of damage limitation. She has chosen to come 
to this region because she was informed that there was no casino. 
Her attempt to protect the remnants of her inheritance from the 
hopeless gambling of her father is thwarted by circumstance. Twice 
she makes the link between cards and evil, the latter reference 
identifying The Beast with the devil for the ease with which he 
deprives her father of everything. 
While the original ‘Beauty and the Beast’ perhaps underpins the tale 
in certain recognisable elements, this is not a simple updating. Nor 
does the narrative have much in common with its closest myth. In 
terms of setting, however, Carter remains true to the story. She has 
chosen to set this tale, in the best fairy-tale tradition, long ago, in a 
far-off place. The distance, in both time and space, helps the reader 
to accept the tale; the modern setting of the other version does not 
achieve this sense of distance in the same way. 
The character of the father, feckless as he is, provides the opportunity 
for the first moral difference between the tales. Though The Beast is 
the moral superior of the father in each tale, in this version the 
admonition of neglected paternal duty to protect the child is much 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Shrek (2001) by 
DreamWorks 
Animation is based 
upon William Steig's 
fairy-tale picture 
book entitled 
Shrek! (1990). The 
film parodies Disney 
versions of fairy 
tales and inverts 
the aesthetic values 
inherent in the tale 
of 'Beauty and the 
Beast'. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
John Webster's 
The White Devil 
(published in 1612), 
a revenge tragedy, 
explores themes of 
murder, debauchery, 
corruption and 
revenge. It uses the 
device of an Italian 
setting to comment 
on English society, 
much in the way 
Carter's settings are 
a distancing device 
that allows the 
reader to make 
connections 
imaginatively. 
In Webster's case 
the device was a 
necessity to avoid 
censorship. 
The Bloody Chamber 41 

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
The Tiger's Bride The text 
more clearly expressed: ‘If you are so careless of your treasures, you 
should expect them to be taken from you’ (p. 60). The father is not 
permitted to see The Beast’s home in this version; Beauty is taken 
there as a prize, not as a hostage to her father’s fortune. 
The Beast’s requests to see her naked are expressed through 
an almost comically embarrassed valet, who gabbles the deal 
at top speed. There is no sense of threat in this request, unlike 
the voyeurism in ‘The Bloody Chamber’, more a sense of 
the ridiculous. The woman is able to laugh the proposal off with a 
challenge of her own: pay no more than you would for ‘any other 
woman in such circumstances’ (p. 65). It is a riposte that exposes the 
cheap and degrading bargain on offer. Her argument is that, no 
matter what the price may be, the deal denies her identity, so why 
bother to look at her face? Her silence in the face of his repeated 
though barely articulated request is evidence of a much more 
resourceful and resilient character in this version of the story. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Art critic, painter 
and writer John 
Berger (b.1926) 
explores the idea 
of the male gaze 
in Ways of Seeing 
(1972). Men gaze 
at women, he says, 
in the assumption 
that they can do 
something to or 
for them; this 
gives them power. 
Women, however, 
view themselves 
being looked at and 
constantly carry 
their own image 
with them: 'Men 
look at women. 
Women watch 
themselves being 
looked at' 
(p. 47). 
The automaton, an imitation of Beauty, is an intriguing symbol. 
Beauty does not recognise herself at first, but later decides to send 
this imitation out into the world. The assumption that no one will 
notice the difference is a comment on how patriarchal society 
simultaneously idealises and marginalises women. While 
considering the allegedly soulless existence of animals, this young 
woman muses angrily on the emptiness of the ‘imitative life 
amongst men’ (p. 70) that she has been allowed by her father. The 
mutual revelation that takes place between Beauty and The Beast is 
quite touching, despite its fantastic weirdness. The woman now 
accepts The Beast as ‘courteously curious as to the fleshly nature 
of women’ (p. 72) and she reciprocates the desire to do ‘no harm’ 
(p. 71). 
In deciding not to return to the world of men, represented primarily 
by the greedy opportunism of her father, the woman realises she has 
been changed by her experience. She no longer resembles the image 
of her former beauty as displayed to her by the automaton: a 
‘smiling girl ... poised in the oblivion of her balked simulation 
of life’ (p. 73). Carter allows the narrator to give a succinct 
summation of the feminist concept of the ‘male gaze’ - ‘the market 
place, where the eyes that watch you take no account of your 
existence’ (p. 74) - but she compares that gaze to the blindness of 
42 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
The text The Tiger’s Bride 
the automaton, suggesting it is a manufactured and unnatural 
response, not an irrevocable condition of masculinity per se. 
The Beast’s gift of teardrop earrings seems to be a coded plea for her 
to listen to his emotional distress. When she fixes them to her ears she 
finds them ‘very heavy’ (p. 73), but they are all she chooses to wear to 
meet The Beast again in his room. In one way this resembles the use 
of jewellery and nakedness in ‘The Bloody Chamber’, but in this tale 
the woman makes the choice of her own free will, without coercion, 
to decorate herself with the evidence of masculine sentiment. They 
are the last thing to change in the story, which may be a comment on 
how sentiments linger on in the world as it changes. It could be that 
Carter is representing a notion that male ideas of women will not 
change until women have changed themselves to be as autonomous 
and independent as men, especially those who have dropped the mask 
of their masculinity. The ending of the story seems to be advising the 
reader that it might be a good idea for men and women to see each 
other as they really are and that mutual recognition of a shared animal 
nature is the basis of happiness in human relationships. 
GLOSSARY 
56 grappa a form of brandy made from grapes 
57 profligate wasteful and self-indulgent 
58 civet African mammal, sometimes compared to a cat, 
whose musk is used as the basis of perfume 
59 stock a scarf worn around the neck, usually for riding 
60 Capisco Italian verb meaning 'understand' 
63 gracile gracefully slender 
65 Desnuda naked (Spanish) 
66 soubrette in theatre, particularly opera, a female comedy 
character - a servant or friend of the leading female 
character - sexually provocative, talkative and irreverent 
settecento minuet a term normally used to describe 
eighteenth-century culture in Italian - literally meaning 'seven 
hundred' - here a reference to late baroque music style 
68 Tantivy! a hunting cry used to urge horses and their riders 
into a gallop 
69 trompe I'oeil an artistic optical illusion, used to trick the eye 
into believing an image is the object it represents 
70 Kublai Khan thirteenth-century Mongol emperor, grandson 
of Genghis Khan 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
In The World's Wife 
(1999), a satirical 
collection which 
revises a number 
of myths and fairy 
tales, poet Carol 
Ann Duffy plays 
with gender roles 
and allows the 
female voice to be 
heard. In 'Mrs Beast' 
the Beast, as with 
Carter's Beast in 
'The Tiger's Bride', 
is not transformed 
into a man; instead 
he remains bestial, 
at the mercy of Mrs 
Beast, who 'came 
to the House of the 
Beast /... knowing 
my own mind' 
(15-16). There is no 
sense of equality in 
this relationship, 
however; it is the 
female who is in 
charge: 'Bring me 
the Beast for the 
night' (91). 
The Bloody Chamber 43 

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
Puss-in-Boots The text 
CONTEXT 
Danish author 
Hans Christian 
Andersen 
(1805-75), 
considered one 
of the world's 
greatest 
storytellers, began 
publishing his 
pamphlets of fairy 
tales in 1835. He 
wrote over one 
hundred and fifty 
of these stories, 
including 'The 
Little Mermaid', 
'The Wild Swans' 
and 'The Snow 
Queen'; they were 
translated into 
English in 1846. 
V_7 
®CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read 
Andersen's fairy 
tales online at 
http://hca.gilead. 
org.il 
Puss-in-Boots 
• Puss-in-Boots agrees to work for a penniless young officer. 
• The officer falls in love with a young woman married to a rich 
old man. 
• Puss-in-Boots and his companion, a tabby cat, bring the 
lovers together and arrange the murderous solution to all 
their problems. 
• Puss-in-Boots, the tabby cat and the lovers happily set up a 
new home together. 
Puss-in-Boots, a ginger tomcat, agrees to be servant to a young 
cavalry officer and shares his fortunes, both good and bad. The cat’s 
master is besotted by the beauty of Signor Panteleone’s young wife. 
By serenading her at her balcony, the young man succeeds in getting 
the attention of the young woman, but further contact is prevented 
by her chaperone, an unpleasant old woman. With the assistance of 
another cat, a female tabby, one of Puss-in-Boots’s lovers, a scheme 
is plotted for the cavalry officer to be with the young woman while 
the chaperone’s attention is diverted to the problem of a sudden 
infestation of rats. 
Posing as expert rat-catchers, the young soldier and Puss-in-Boots 
gain admission to the house, and the young wife, Ta belle’, sends the 
chaperone away to recover from the ‘rising pandemonium’, leaving 
her alone to welcome her new lover (p. 88). The cat keeps up a 
pretended noise of battle with imaginary rats to disguise the sound 
of the lovers’ mutual pleasure. Puss-in-Boots ensures they do not 
leave the house without a handsome payment, but it becomes clear 
that this affair is unlike the man’s other adventures. He becomes 
determined to find a way to be with her, and together the cats plot 
the murder of the husband, ensuring that they will benefit from the 
arrangements. 
The cats take control. The old man is sent tumbling downstairs to 
a broken neck by the tabby cat; and the young man, posing as a 
doctor, is able to enjoy another happy moment with his lover. With 
44 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
The text Puss-in-Boots 
her husband dead and the chaperone under her control, the young 
widow takes charge of financial matters to everyone’s satisfaction. 
The story concludes with a contented tomcat congratulating himself 
on his talents, enjoying the delights of family life having fathered 
three ginger kittens with the tabby, and conceitedly not recognising 
that it was the tabby cat that had all the best ideas. 
Commentary 
Carter clearly enjoys this tale. It is a bawdy romp drawing on the 
stock characters of commedia dell’arte, which transferred from the 
professional performance troupes of Italy to influence the theatrical 
traditions in Britain. Pantomime remains one of the most common 
early childhood memories of theatre for British theatregoers and 
non-theatregoers alike. In its current form pantomime has no 
equivalents in modern European theatre or elsewhere, despite the 
common heritage. Carter takes the familiar pantomime tale and 
resites it in Bergamo, the place of commedia dell’arte’s origins, 
returning it to its roots in popular entertainment and grossly 
exaggerated, often violent, physical comedy. 
Anthropomorphism is not problematic in pantomime or fairy 
tale. Puss-in-Boots’s enduring appeal as a rascally but inventive 
Everyman character is complemented well by the narcissism of 
his feline attributes and manners. The origins of this character lie 
in the mockery of the uncouth aspirations and pretensions of 
provincial types from Bergamo, who sought their fortune in urban 
Venice. Puss-in-Boots is faking it, but comes out on top; he 
represents the triumph of the Tittle man’. While Carter gives this 
character some of the attributes of the stock servant character 
Arlecchino, or Harlequin, such as tremendous and superfluous 
acrobatic agility, the young officer is the inamorato of the tale, the 
typical young lover motivated by lust, love, music and passion but 
lacking in common sense. 
The chief obstacles to youthful fulfilment in this tale are direct 
models of commedia dell’arte characters known as the vecchi, the 
old ones. Signor Panteleone is the equivalent of the stock type 
Pantalone, though Carter makes an obscure etymological 
connection to the word ‘lion’ in the spelling of his name. 
CHECK 
THE NET 
A useful illustrated 
introduction to the 
characters and 
masks of commedia 
dell'arte can be 
found at 
www.delpiano.com 
- click on 'Carnival', 
'Venezia' and 
'Commedia 
dell'Arte'. 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
The Carry On films, 
a long-running 
series that began 
in 1958, directed by 
Gerald Thomas and 
produced by Peter 
Rogers, were a 
combination of 
slapstick, parody, 
innuendo and 
double entendres, 
the comedy seen 
as typically British 
humour derived 
from farce and 
music hall. The 
humour stems as 
much from the 
same company of 
actors playing stock 
characters from film 
to film as it does 
from the script or 
situation in each 
film. 
The Bloody Chamber 45 

=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
Puss-in-Boots The text 
CONTEXT 
Harlequin Doctor 
Faustus (1723), 
staged at London's 
Drury Lane 
Theatre, is 
thought to be 
the first English 
pantomime. Its 
popular success 
led to a theatrical 
rivalry between 
Drury Lane and 
Lincoln's Inn Fields 
Theatre, whose 
Necromancer, 
or Harlequin 
Executed, was 
staged in 
December 1723. 
v_ J 
This typically mean old man, usually played as impotent and 
desperate to relive his youth through the pursuit of younger women 
in equal measure, is rich and powerful. His young wife appears at 
first to be the counterpart inamorata to the young man, usually 
called Isabella or Lucinda, but her active part in the resolution of 
the story makes her a more direct match for Columbine, the female 
counterpart to Harlequin: energetic, acrobatic and feisty. The role 
of Columbine, the agile and resourceful servant, is shared with the 
tabby cat that Puss-in-Boots so happily impregnates but fails to 
appreciate. 
The chaperone, variously called ‘dragon’, ‘hag’ or ‘man-hater’ in the 
tale, is based on La Ruffiana, the gossiping old woman who keeps 
the inamorati apart. This is the role that would be performed by a 
man in drag on stage, as an impersonation of an archetype of the 
female, the role of the pantomime ‘dame’. There is a sense in which 
she is the substitute for the patriarchal figure in the story, acting as 
guardian of his property, so the idea that she is a man in woman’s 
clothing is not as ridiculous as it might seem. 
Disguise and pretence are themes that Carter exuberantly explores 
in her use of the devices and characters of the commedia dell’arte 
tradition. The young man assumes the mask of Signor Furioso 
(Mr Frenzy) to enter both the house and his lover in a frenetic 
display of youthful energy. When he later returns as a bogus doctor, 
Carter is playing with the stock commedia character 11 Dottore, 
who is useless as a medic, useless with women and speaks only 
pseudo-intellectual nonsense. Beneath his disguise, the young 
man is the very opposite of this member of the vecchi. 
It is the only story in the collection in which the narrative voice is 
masculine, and the self-aggrandisement is punctured for the reader 
by the knowledge that it was the young female characters who took 
control of the situation and ensured a happy outcome. Puss-in- 
Boots remains very pleased with himself, unaware that in his new 
role as ‘family man’ he is still an impostor. 
46 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
The text The Snow Child 
GLOSSARY 
76 Figaro central character in the comic opera by Rossini based 
on the traditional commedia dell'arte character Brighella, 
liar and schemer, from Bergamo 
obbligato usually a particularly difficult solo in a piece of 
music 
77 rococo originally meaning 'old-fashioned', now applied 
to a definite and highly ornamental style of design and 
decoration popular in eighteenth-century France and Italy 
genuflection from the Latin genuflectere, meaning 'to 
bend the knee'; a sign of respect, particularly in Christian 
rituals 
pontiff's a pontiff is a Catholic clergyman of high status, 
a bishop or the pope 
78 billet-doux a love letter 
79 Aldebaran a star in the constellation of Taurus, one of the 
brightest stars in the sky 
83 discommoded inconvenienced, given trouble or discomfort 
mountebank a confidence trickster, particularly a bogus 
medical doctor or 'quack' 
zany derived from the Italian zanni, 'buffoon', a familiar 
form of the name Giovanni, the nickname given to mad 
acrobatic clowns in the commedia dell'arte tradition 
88 saraband a slow, graceful court dance of the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries 
V_/ 
The Snow Child 
• The Count and his wife go riding. 
• He wishes for a beautiful girl. 
• The girl appears and the Countess is jealous. 
• The Countess destroys the girl. 
• The Count still desires the dead girl; and the Countess, though 
she has everything, learns that jealousy can be painful. 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
New versions of 
classic tales were 
shown in 2008 on 
BBC One in the 
series Fairy Tales. 
Rapunzel was set 
in the competitive 
world of tennis, 
Cinderella in the 
academic world 
of anthropology, 
The Empress's 
New Clothes in the 
celebrity world of 
award ceremonies, 
and Billy Goat in the 
music industry. The 
BBC's approach 
shared elements 
with Carter's - the 
head of drama for 
Northern Ireland, 
Patrick Spence, 
stated: 'these stories 
offer such fantastic 
scope for comedy 
drama'. 
An aristocrat riding with his wife wishes for a girl as beautiful as 
the objects he sees in nature. The child of his desire appears before 
them. The Countess hates her and attempts to kill her, but each 
The Bloody Chamber 47 

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
The Snow Child The text 
CONTEXT 
The revision of 
fairy tales and 
myths is common 
in women's poetry. 
A poem may 
contain a single 
image from a 
myth or tale, or a 
complete collection 
may be given over 
to rewritings, such 
as Carol Ann 
Duffy's The World's 
Wife (1999), Liz 
Lochhead's The 
Grimm Sisters 
(1981) and 
Anne Sexton's 
Transformations 
(1971). 
r CONTEXT 
Poe's 'The Raven' 
(1845) was 
published in the 
newspaper the 
New York Evening 
Mirror to popular 
acclaim. 
v_/ 
CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read Poe's 
poem 'The Raven' 
online at 
www.online- 
literature.com 
attempt leaves her worse off than before. She succeeds at the 
third attempt when the child pricks her finger on a rose and dies. 
The Count is upset and briefly has intercourse with the dead girl, 
who melts away. The Countess regains everything she has lost 
and the Count gives her the rose that killed the girl, which 
she drops. 
Commentary 
‘The Snow Child’ is the shortest tale in the collection, yet its power 
to shock and disturb is not diminished by its relative brevity. As a 
version of ‘Snow White’, Carter gives us an enigmatic tale that may 
be interpreted as an exploration of sexual jealousy and competition 
between women for the attention of men; or as an allegory of the 
familial tension between parents and children, more particularly 
the triangle of relationships between mother and daughter, father 
and daughter, and mother and father. 
The Countess is a striking figure, ‘glittering’ and ‘shining’ in 
black fur with a touch of scarlet (p. 105). She is dressed in the 
‘pelts of black foxes’ (p. 105), an anthropomorphic image of sly 
and cunning sexuality. The Count, however, has inexplicable 
desires for another, an imaginary girl he wishes into existence. 
The symbolic significance of his desires is communicated in the 
similes of his three wishes: snow, blood and a raven. His desire 
is a mixture of coldness, bloodthirstiness and fatality. The raven 
is an icon of Gothic literature, classically epitomised in Edgar 
Allan Poe’s narrative poem ‘The Raven’, but the mythic 
association of this black, carrion-eating, croak-voiced bird with 
death and portents of death is much older and more widespread 
in cultures across the world. Carter suggests that the Count, yet 
another aristocrat, is a cold-blooded killer in his desire for a girl 
‘as red as blood’ (p. 105). The tale then allows him to have the 
girl he wishes for: he has fathered the girl of his dreams. This 
may be a comment on how patriarchy shapes women in the 
image of men’s desires and, as can be seen, not much good comes 
of this. 
The Countess’s envious attempts to abandon the girl, then drown 
her, are thwarted by the Count. The symbols employed here, 
48 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
The text The Snow Child 
clothing and jewellery, stand for the transference of affection 
from older to younger woman that is commonplace in society. 
The Countess is left with only the Count’s pity. The third 
symbolic device she employs against the girl is more devious. 
It is a typical deception as practised by the stepmother and evil 
old crone in ‘Snow White’, a seemingly harmless gesture or act of 
kindness concealing murderous intent. The picking of the rose, a 
symbol combining the perfection of natural beauty and the thorn 
as a metaphor for the inevitable pains of loving, is allowed by 
the Count. He fails to protect his child from the jealousy of his 
wife, and the girl dies bleeding and screaming. The scene of 
graphic necrophilia that follows is perhaps the most extreme 
image in the whole collection. The Countess is reduced, briefly, 
to the role of spectator. Carter seems to suggest here that women 
know men would rather indulge themselves with dead fantasies 
than accept women as they really are, a depressing and morbid 
view of human relationships. 
The conclusion of the tale is somewhat ambiguous. Has the 
Countess been hurt by the rose thorn herself or does she, because 
she is aware that it ‘bites’ (p. 106), drop the rose before it can 
hurt her as it hurt the man’s fantasy child? If it is the latter, is she 
rejecting love itself in trying to avoid the pain of love? If it is the 
former, would that suggest in hurting another woman she has 
only hurt herself and left the real villain, the Count, unscathed 
and unpunished? 
GLOSSARY 
105 immaculate pure, without stain or blemish, perfect - the 
paradox of virgin birth in Christian doctrine is solved with 
the notion of immaculate conception as a form of divine 
intervention 
106 virile member the phallus or erect penis 
^_____' 
CONTEXT 
Carter wrote in 
an afterword to 
her short story 
collection 
Fireworks (1974): 
'I'd always been 
fond of Poe, and 
Hoffman - Gothic 
tales, cruel tales, 
tales of wonder, 
tales of terror, 
fabulous narratives 
that deal directly 
with the imagery 
of the unconscious 
- mirrors; the 
externalised self; 
forsaken castles; 
haunted forests; 
forbidden sexual 
objects.' 
v_ 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Gina Wisker's essay 
'Behind Locked 
Doors: Angela 
Carter, Horror and 
the Influence of 
Edgar Allan Poe', in 
Re-Visiting Angela 
Carter: Texts, 
Contexts, Intertexts, 
edited by Rebecca 
Munford (2006), 
is helpful in 
appreciating the 
intertextuality at 
work in Carter's 
writing. 
The Bloody Chamber 49 

=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
The Lady of the House of Love The text 
CONTEXT 
The symbolic and 
intertextual 
meanings of the 
Tarot cards dealt by 
the vampire are 
highly relevant. 
'La Mort' (p. 109), 
Death, is a symbol 
of mortality and 
also of lust or 
desire. The card of 
'Les Amoureux' 
(p. 112), the Lovers, 
symbolises perfect 
communication and 
mutual fulfilment. 
'La Tour Abolie' 
(p. 109), the Ruined 
Tower, is an 
appropriately 
Gothic symbol of 
annihilation and 
destruction often 
interpreted as the 
extinction of false 
belief or the coming 
of war. 
I _ 
jCHECK 
THE FILM 
F. W. Murnau's 
Nosferatu: A 
Symphony of Horror 
(1922) was an 
unauthorised 
adaptation of Stoker's 
Dracuta. Despite the 
fact that Stoker's 
widow sued 
successfully and 
demanded the 
destruction of all 
copies, the film 
survived to become 
one of the most 
influential films 
in history. 
50 The Bloody Chamber 
The Lady of the House of Love 
• A beautiful vampire lurks in a Carpathian chateau. 
• An innocent young soldier arrives in her village. 
• Instead of becoming her victim, he unknowingly ends her 
existence. 
• The vampire becomes human and dies. 
• The soldier returns to the world to go to war. 
‘The Lady of the House of Love’ is set in the Carpathian 
mountain region in central Eastern Europe and the main action 
of the tale takes place in the early years of the second decade of the 
twentieth century, just before the outbreak of the First World War. 
A beautiful vampire, doomed to eternal life, reflects on the form of 
imprisonment she suffers, in between bouts of feasting on the 
occasional traveller or shepherd boy. Tarot cards at her desk foretell 
death for visitors. Until, that is, the arrival of a young soldier, an 
officer, changes the order of events. 
The officer’s virginity and his rational lack of imagination are the 
main reasons she has no power over him. In his innocence, he 
changes the order of her deck of Tarot cards, replacing Death with 
the Lovers. She expects to devour him but, for the first time ever, 
her ritual does not follow the usual pattern, and she finds herself 
becoming human once more. He puts her to bed like a parent might 
look after a child. When he awakes, full of hope for the future, he 
discovers his new love has died as an old woman. He is roughly 
dispatched by the housekeeper and returns to his regiment, in time 
to depart for the war in France. 
Commentary 
Among other references, this vampire tale turns the passive female 
Sleeping Beauty on her pretty little head. The princess is not 
sleeping; she is preying on unwary men - and she is not waiting 
to be rescued. She is neither alive nor dead; she is undead: the 
references to Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1897) and its many cinematic 
adaptations clutter the tale with multiple intertextual allusions. 

=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
The text The Lady of the House of Love 
In the original fairy tale, the princess is saved from an evil death by 
being put to sleep, not ageing a day, until rescued by a handsome 
prince whose love revives her to live happily ever after. In Carter’s 
version the Countess craves some kind of release from her ritualised 
and repetitive immortality; her rescue comes in the form of death. 
The love of the handsome prince restores her true age and 
humanity. He escapes death at her hands only to enter the 
bloodbath of the First World War, where the average life expectancy 
among junior officers was measured not in years but in months. 
The abandoned village is a place of ghosts, shadows and distant 
sobbing, and has ‘a sense of unease’ (p. 107). But Carter balances 
the subtlety and vindictiveness of her criminal monsters with hints 
that they cannot help themselves. They are helplessly sleepwalking 
through eternity, with little variation in diet, and the chief emotion 
of the vampire is ‘sadness’ (p. 107). Carter points out how the 
vampire merges two opposite images into one monstrous form. 
In Renaissance art, young women are often depicted as vulnerable 
victims menaced by a bony skeleton representing death. The 
images are allegories of the mortality of the human form, the 
impermanence of beauty and the inevitability of death. The 
skeleton always appears as a masculine and predatory figure. In a 
sense, the female vampire has paid the price for subsuming the role 
of the male, preserving her beauty at the cost of becoming the thing 
that threatened her. The song of the caged lark pleases her because 
if mirrors her own imprisonment in her unnaturally preserved 
beauty. Her perfect beauty is a ‘deformity’ (p. 108) because it is 
so perfectly inhuman. 
The vampire queen is a malevolent sexual presence, whose ‘army of 
shadows’ (p. 109) interfere with nature, turn good things into bad, 
sweet into sour and generally cause young women, in particular, 
‘diseases of the imagination’ (p. 109). The diseases hinted at are 
the extremes of behaviour that might be categorised as forms of 
manic depression in modern medical terms. Carter is alluding to 
the work of the Renaissance scholar and depressive Robert 
Burton (1577-1640), who wrote The Anatomy of Melancholy 
(first published in 1621). Among the diseases Burton considers 
are St Vitus’s dance - ‘the lascivious dance’ - and Tycanthropia ... 
or wolf-madness’, as well as ‘frenzy’ and ‘possession of devils’. 
CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read 
Burton's Anatomy 
of Melancholy 
online at 
www.gutenberg. 
org - search for 
the title and 
'Democritus Junior'. 
CONTEXT 
Lyca nth ropy is the 
belief that wolves 
and men have the 
ability to transform 
into one another. 
Examples of 
lycanthropy are 
common to folk 
tales around the 
world. Carter deals 
with lycanthropy 
in her last three 
stories in The 
Bloody Chamber. 
The Bloody Chamber 51 

=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
The Lady of the House of Love The text 
QUESTION 
In 'The Lady of 
the House of Love', 
the supernatural 
mingles with the 
mundane: why and 
how does Carter 
use this typical 
feature of Gothic 
texts in this tale? 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In Chapter 8 of 
Great Expectations 
(1860-1) Pip 
describes his first 
meeting with Miss 
Havisham: 'I saw that 
the bride within the 
bridal dress had 
withered ... and had 
no brightness left 
but the brightness 
of her sunken eyes. 
I saw that... the 
figure ... had shrunk 
to skin and bone. ... 
Now, waxwork and 
skeleton seemed to 
have dark eyes that 
moved and looked 
at me.' 
The vampire’s self-fulfilling prophecy is a cycle of "wisdom, death, 
dissolution’ (p. 109). The obscene consumption of human flesh is 
only depicted in the housekeeper's careful manicure of her mistress’s 
fingernails afterwards. The voice of the man-eating giant from 'Jack 
and the Beanstalk’ impertinently interrupts the narrative to boom 
out his cannibalistic desires (p. 111). The juxtaposition of the prim 
rituals of the vampire and the relativelv safe monster of childhood 
tales is a startling narrative link to the arrival of the hero. 
The young man, a soldier in a generation of young men doomed 
to a horrible death in circumstances that beggared imagination, 
is a cheerfullv rational adventurer. Carter alludes to the novel by 
Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (1547-1616), The 
Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote tie U M.meha (published in two 
parts in 1605 and 1615), in which the hero, inspired by his reading 
of literature, sets out on a series of crazy adventures before being 
disillusioned by the difference between his ideal world and reality. The 
connection to Carter’s character is Don Quixote's inability to imagine 
himself capable of failure or defeat. The irony, of course, is that Carter 
has already signalled her soldier’s doom while also recognising the 
‘special glamour’ (p. 112) of those prevented from growing old by war. 
In this sense, the allure of youth and beautv is shared by the vampire 
and the young man. She becomes old before eventually dying, whereas 
his obliterated youthfulness will endure only in the memory of those 
who choose not to forget: he will never be old. 
The intoxication of the senses through powerful aromatic sensation 
features in this story too. The young man’s response Too many 
roses’ (p. 113) is evidence of his masculine indifference to perfume 
as he moves through the thorn bushes surrounding the chateau. 
Carter does not overplay the allusion to Prince Charming hacking 
his way through the undergrowth to reach his bride-to-be. The man 
is surprised by the ‘ruinous’ state of the interior (p. 115), which is 
entirely in keeping with the ‘Gothic eternity’ (p. 112) of vampire 
legends: ‘cobwebs, worm-eaten beams ... endless corridors ... 
winding staircases ... eyes of family portraits briefly flickered 
as they passed’ (p. 115). Carter has included most of the cliches 
of terrible, spooky interiors from the Gothic genre, as well as 
a striking reinvention of Charles Dickens’s famous character 
from Great Expectations, Miss Havisham, who, jilted on her 
52 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
The text The Lady of the House of Love 
wedding day, shuts out the light and rots in the decay of her 
wedding feast. 
Although the vampire tries to maintain the ritual of her 
consumption of the prey, she is unable to resist the young man. 
The rational, unimaginative male ends up destroying the irrational, 
fantastic female. He comforts her when she cuts herself and he 
seems to be playing the role of parent to her as now helpless child. 
Carter insists on comparing him to the mother, perhaps excluding 
the character’s gender to make a point about perceived parenting 
roles, as he deals with her wound and tries to ‘kiss it better’ (p. 123). 
She was ‘an invention of darkness’ (p. 124), banished by the 
morning light. The soldier’s reaction to her ‘pathetic’ death is 
expressed as a vague curiosity to keep something of her alive in 
the impulse to ‘resurrect her rose’ (p. 124). The rose, an intimate 
memory of her, is a portent of his imminent death. Although the 
‘maiden’ in the vampire has been defeated, ‘death’ regains its 
‘corrupt, brilliant, baleful splendour’ in the ‘monstrous flower’ the 
soldier has revived (p. 125). Carter is pointing us towards the fact 
that, no matter how bizarre or unpalatable our fantasies of death 
may be, the real world of men can be horrible beyond the scope 
of imagination. 
See Extended commentaries: Text 4 for further discussion of part 
of this story. 
GLOSSARY 
107 revenants ghosts from the past - from the French revenir, 
'to return' 
somnambulist sleepwalker 
death and the maiden title of an oil painting by sixteenth- 
century artist Hans Baldung; also a poem by German writer 
Matthias Claudius set to music by Franz Schubert in the 
nineteenth century; more recently a play by Ariel Dorfman 
(1990) 
109 tenebrous dark and gloomy 
Tarot derived from fourteenth-century playing cards, a 
stylised set of symbolic images used in fortune-telling 
111 escritoire writing desk 
continued 
V___/ 
CHECK 
THE NET 
The Literary Gothic 
website - 
www.litgothic.com 
- is a good place to 
start researching 
the genre. 
CONTEXT 
The Tarot card 'La 
Papesse' (p. 109), 
the Female Pope, 
is a symbol of the 
superior intellectual 
powers feminists 
attribute to 
women. La Papesse, 
often interpreted as 
insight, intuition or 
secret knowledge, 
is linked to the 
legend of Pope 
Joan. According 
to this tale, in the 
ninth century a 
woman disguised as 
a man was elected 
to the papacy. After 
reigning more than 
two years, she is 
said to have been 
fatally exposed by 
giving birth in 
public. Her story is 
an iconic feminist 
tale often cited as 
an example of how 
women have been 
written out of 
history by men. 
V___ 
The Bloody Chamber 53 

=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
The Lady or the House of Love The text 
CONTEXT 
Bram Stoker 
allows the legends 
of werewolf and 
vampire to 
be almost 
indistinguishable 
in his novel 
Dracula (1897). 
His vampire 
assumes many 
different animal 
shapes through 
the story, and it is 
particularly thanks 
to cinematic 
adaptations that 
Dracula is now 
identified with the 
vampire bat rather 
than the wolf. 
V___/ 
r GLOSSARY 
116 bedizened dressed up or overdressed in fine clothes 
118 carillons sounds resembling a peal of bells 
119 Vous serez ma proie You will be my prey (French) 
121 Suivez-moi Follow me (French) 
Je vous attendais 1 have waited for you (French) 
122 lugubrious mournful 
V _> 
The Company of Wolves 
• The wolves in the winter forest are hungry. 
• A girl sets off through the forest to her granny’s house. 
• She meets a young man, who bets her a kiss he can be at 
Granny’s before her. 
• The young man-wolf arrives first and eats Granny. 
• The young girl sleeps soundly in Granny’s bed with the wolf. 
CONTEXT 
Jacob and Wilhelm 
Grimm published 
Kinder- und 
Hausmarchen 
(Children's and 
Household Tales), 
containing eighty- 
six folk tales, in 
1812. Later 
editions expanded 
to include two 
hundred stories 
plus ten children's 
legends. The 
Brothers Grimm 
are usually 
thought of as the 
source of most 
well-known 
fairy tales. 
I _ 
A lengthy preamble describing the dangers of hungry wolves in 
the forest sets the scene of the tale. The story of a wolf trapped in a 
pit changing into a man is followed by the story of a man who 
unwisely relieves himself outside at night and disappears. His wife 
remarries and has children, only for her first husband to return. 
Enraged by her behaviour, the first husband turns into a wolf and is 
killed after savaging one of her children. The wolf turns back into 
the man again when he is dead. An urgent warning is given about 
the importance of running away from naked men in the forest. 
The tale begins at this point. A young girl confidently prepares 
for the journey through the forest to her granny’s house. On her 
journey a stranger appears and walks along with her, challenging her 
to a race to Granny’s house to win a kiss from her. She wants him to 
win, so dawdles along as he leaves the path. The stranger arrives at 
Granny’s house and pretends to be the girl to trick the old woman 
into inviting him inside. Stripping naked, he turns into a wolf and 
eats her. He then disguises himself with Granny’s nightcap and 
waits for the girl to arrive. 
54 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
1 
The text The Company of Wolves 
The young girl arrives and is trapped by the man; the house is 
surrounded by howling wolves. She ceases to be afraid and strips 
her clothes off, burning them in the fire. She kisses the stranger and 
takes off his shirt and burns it, thus making the man completely into 
a wolf. Christmas Day arrives and the blizzard outside dies down. 
The story concludes with the sweet image of the fearless girl 
sleeping in her granny’s bed with the wolf. 
Commentary 
The narrative technique Carter employs here delays the 
development of plot and the introduction of main characters for 
some considerable length as she describes the nature of wolves and 
the dangers of encountering these ‘forest assassins’ (p. 129). The 
instruction on how to take precautions and defend children from 
the wolves is followed immediately by an ominous note of warning 
that hints at other, more fantastical dangers: ‘the wolf may be more 
than he seems’ (p. 130). The two miniature tales of encounters with 
werewolves act as a preface to the main story. The only hint of 
protection against a werewolf is the belief of ‘old wives’ (p. 132) 
that clothing can keep the wolf at bay. Burning a wolf’s clothes 
prevents him regaining his form as a man. 
Carter introduces the tale itself after this lengthy preamble and the 
narrative swiftly unfolds. She cloaks the young girl who is setting 
off into the forest with the protection of ‘the invisible pentacle of 
her own virginity’ (p. 133). The allusions to ‘Little Red Riding 
Hood’ draw upon the significance of blood as the physical evidence 
of passing from girl to woman. Carter describes her as ‘an unbroken 
egg’ to emphasise her vulnerability, but adds that ‘she is afraid of 
nothing’ (p. 133). Her mother allows her to make the journey that 
her father, if he were around, would prevent. Carter seems to be 
suggesting that men prefer girls not to change into women, 
preferring to keep them in a dependent position, infantilising 
them in order to maintain their patriarchal authority. 
The scene between the young girl and the stranger is swiftly, and 
somewhat dismissively, summarised by Carter as ‘Commonplaces 
of a rustic seduction’, and the girl is happy to lose her bet with the 
‘handsome gentleman’ (p. 135). Her God-fearing granny is also 
speedily dispatched by the werewolf. The nakedness of the young 
CONTEXT 
Charles Perrault's 
'Le Petit Chaperon 
rouge' ('Little Red 
Riding Hood') is 
the original source 
of this fairy tale 
(1697). In it the 
child is eaten, 
and a moral on 
the virtues of 
obedience 
accompanies the 
story. A new 
version, 
'Rotkappchen' 
('Little Red-Cap'), 
appeared in the 
Brothers Grimm 
collection in 1812. 
V_-7 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Routledge's 
Complete Fairy Tales 
(2002) includes 
every one of the 
two hundred and 
ten tales collected 
by the Brothers 
Grimm, including 
'Little Red Cap'. 
The Bloody Chamber 55 

=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
The Company of Wolves The text 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Women and Media 
(1980), edited by 
Helen Baehr, was 
one of the first texts 
of feminist media 
analysis to explore 
the stereotyping of 
women in the mass 
media and the 
related question of 
women as media 
executives. 
QUESTION 
Carter refers to the 
beliefs and values 
of paganism in 
her tales: in what 
ways might this 
contribute to her 
reputation as a 
writer of 'extreme' 
or shocking tales? 
man, the impressive size of his genitals, is menacing and deadly: 
‘The last thing’ (p. 136) seen by the ‘pious old woman’ (p. 135). 
In many versions of the original tale, Granny is rescued from the 
belly of the wolf; Carter allows no such comforting possibility here. 
Granny is not coming back in this story. Anything that is of no use 
to the wolf, he burns or hides away out of sight. The language 
refrains of the original tale, the awed recognition of the size of 
the bodily features of the wolf, are interspersed with the girl’s 
realisation of the danger she faces. Even at this moment, she can feel 
pity for the wolves outside in the cold. She has no use for fear as she 
strips to reveal herself to the man. 
Her kiss, though freely given, is an act of deception. Carter has her 
self-confident young woman, who knows she is ‘nobody’s meat’ 
(p. 138), seizing control of the situation and burning the werewolf’s 
clothing. As he can no longer take the shape of a man, he is no 
threat to her. Carter is making the point that masculinity can be 
more dangerous and deadly to women than any carnivore. The 
insistence on the idea of ‘meat’ reflects the feminist perspective on 
the representation of women in the media as mere objects of flesh 
for the consumption of men. The declaration of defiance is a model 
of Carter’s view that women should refuse to accept the allotted 
passive role of victim. 
The ending of the story emphasises the peacefulness of 
reconciliation, with the man-beast tamed. Carter’s assertion 
that Christmas Day is ‘the werewolves’ birthday’ (p. 139) is a 
deliberately confrontational one. While the depiction of Christian 
believers in the story is not tremendously sympathetic - the ‘mad 
old man’ (p. 130) and the ‘Aged and frail’ Granny trying to keep 
the wolf from the door by ‘living well’ (p. 135) - it is unlikely that 
Carter is suggesting Jesus was a werewolf. It is more likely that she 
is drawing our attention to the natural solstice, when the earth tilts 
on its axis and the change in the length of the daylight hours takes 
place. The passing of the shortest day in winter (usually 21 or 22 
December) is an event that was marked with pagan celebrations 
before Christian festivals were placed in December. Carter is 
drawing on a mystic tradition of magic and the belief in solstices 
as particular, special moments when strange possibilities of 
transformation arise. It is an image of the redemption of man 
56 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
The text Wolf-Auce 
through realising the virtues of his animal nature, a theme Carter 
returns to throughout these tales. 
GLOSSARY 
129 incarnate in the flesh, in human form, or naked or blatant 
wraiths a fifteenth-century term for ghosts or spectres 
131 irremediable something that cannot be cured or remedied 
133 cuneiform wedge-shaped, particularly applied to early 
Persian writing 
135 prophylactic a precaution that prevents or guards against 
disease 
138 prothalamion a celebratory song or poem sung before a 
wedding, a term invented by the poet Edmund Spenser 
(c.1552-99) with his 1596 marriage poem 'Prothalamion', 
based on the Greek word epithalamium - a song 
celebrating a marriage 
138 Walpurgisnacht Walpurgis Night, the night of 30 April, 
the eve of May Day, when according to German folklore 
witches meet and revel with the devil; named after the 
English nun Walpurga, a missionary to Germany in the 
eighth century (see also Text 3 of Extended commentaries) 
V___/ 
Wolf-Auce 
• A girl raised by wolves is brought back to human society. 
• She is placed in the care of the Duke, a werewolf. 
• The girl grows up and discovers clothes. 
• The Duke, hunting as a wolf, is wounded by the angry 
widower of one of his victims. 
• The girl tends to the wolf’s wounds and he regains his shape 
as the Duke. 
The tale begins with a description of a wild child, found in a wolf’s 
den, who behaves like a wolf. The nuns charged with her care find 
her intolerable and hand her over to the Duke, who, as it happens, 
is a werewolf. No mention is made of any interaction or contact 
between the Duke and the child; she acts as his servant, using the 
little training given by the nuns, but remains ignorant of his nature. 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Francois Truffaut's 
film L'Enfant 
sauvage (1970) 
retells the story of 
Victor, the wild boy 
of Aveyron, and a 
doctor's attempts to 
educate him. 
The Bloody Chamber 57 

=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
Wolf-Alice The text 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Defoe (1660-1731) 
published Robinson 
Crusoe under the 
title The Life and 
Strange Surprizing 
Adventures of 
Robinson Crusoe, of 
York, Mariner: Who 
lived Eight and 
Twenty Years, 
all alone in an 
un-inhabited Island 
on the Coast of 
America ... Having 
been cast on Shore 
by Shipwreck ... 
Written by Himself. 
This fictional 
autobiography is 
now regarded as 
one of the first 
novels in English 
literature. Friday is 
the name Crusoe 
gives to the native 
he befriends from 
another island. 
58 The Bloody Chamber 
She is bewildered by her first menstrual bleeding and she begins to 
discover her identity as her body changes and matures. She finds a 
white dress behind the mirror and puts it on. The widower of one 
of the Duke’s victims is preparing to hunt down the werewolf and 
take his revenge. Wolf-Alice is present when the Duke is wounded; 
under her care, the Duke recovers his own identity. 
Commentary 
This tale combines werewolf mythology with legends of feral 
children raised by wolves. The idea of human children being raised 
by animals has many precedents; the most obvious is the tale of 
Romulus and Remus, founders of Rome, being suckled by wolves. 
There are documented cases of feral children brought up beyond the 
norms of human society acting very much in the way Wolf-Alice 
behaves, seeing the world in an undeveloped and, in some senses, 
inhuman way. Helen Simpson in her introduction to the 2006 
Vintage edition of The Bloody Chamber (p. xviii) points to the 
origins of this tale in medieval literature, underscoring its credentials 
as a version of ‘Little Red Riding Hood’. 
The narrator of the story is clearly implicated in the rejection of 
the child brought in from the forest, but hides behind the shared 
responsibility of the collective personal pronoun ‘we’. The tale 
begins with the fact that the child is an ‘other’ to the narrator. 
The information that she cannot speak ‘like we do’ (p. 140) invites 
the reader to view the child from the narrator’s perspective, as 
something not like ‘us’. The point is stressed again, later, that the 
child has ‘little in common with the rest of us’ (p. 142). She has 
neither language nor perception of time, attributes the narrator 
clearly sees as the most important assets of human identity. The 
story itself gives away no identifiable place or time. The tale is 
set in a dukedom somewhere in Europe at some point after the 
invention of gunpowder weapons that fire bullets, though the 
narrator’s reference to ‘Man Friday’ (p. 147), a character in 
Daniel Defoe’s novel Robinson Crusoe (1719), suggests the 
eighteenth century. 
Abandoned by the nuns for resisting their teachings, the girl is put 
into the service of the Duke. The most significant thing we are told 
about him is that ‘nothing can hurt him since he ceased to cast an 

=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
The text Wolf-Alice 
image in the mirror’ (p. 142). This conflates the werewolf and 
vampire myths and returns to Bram Stoker’s novel Dracula 
(1897). Stoker similarly combined Eastern European folklore of 
werewolves and vampires to create his monstrous villain, adding the 
inability to cast a reflection in a mirror as his contribution: this 
revealing characteristic is not found in vampires of earlier tales. 
The Duke regards himself to be ‘both less and more than a man’ 
(p. 146), even though he cannot see himself. 
Again Carter explores the significance of the physical process of 
female maturation. The child learns a sense of time through her 
physical connection to the cycles of the moon and her menstrual 
period. But it is the discovery of her reflection in the mirror that is 
the more significant part of her discovery of her personal identity. 
She begins to see that the image in the mirror is ‘herself within it’ 
(p. 147). She is learning the processes of imagination, the ability to 
understand the form and content of images - a human characteristic 
that sets us apart from animals - and she becomes less wolf-like 
from this point in the story. She adopts a white dress she finds 
behind the mirror, another ‘sign of her difference’ from the wolves 
(p. 147), and walks out of the castle on two legs. Wolf-Alice is 
‘far more sentient’ than the Duke, and this gives her the ability 
to survive the revenge attack upon ‘the lord of cobweb castle’ 
(p. 148). 
The mirror now almost becomes a character in the story, recalling 
the uses of magic mirrors in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’; in the original fairy 
tale of ‘Snow White’; and, significantly for the naming of the main 
character, in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass and What 
Alice Found There (1871). The mirror is ‘rational’ (p. 148) and 
impartial, recording the image of the girl, and it also yields ‘as vivid 
as real life itself’ (p. 149) the Duke’s face reflected in the mirror. This 
image of surrender and masculine identity ‘brought into being’ by 
the music and sensuous touch of the girl’s instrument of language is 
yet another version of a happy ending. The woman is creating the 
image of the man, at the end of this story, in order to know him as 
she has come to know herself through her own image. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Lucien Malson's 
Wolf Children and 
the Problem of 
Human Nature 
(1972) includes 
the complete text 
of early accounts 
of Jean-Marc 
Gaspard Itard, the 
nineteenth-century 
physician who 
attempted to teach 
'Victor of Aveyron' 
to speak. Itard 
believed that 
the capacity 
for empathy 
and language 
distinguished 
humans from 
animals; despite 
failing to teach 
Victor to speak, 
Itard believed 
Victor's ability to 
empathise was 
evidence of the 
feral child's 
increased humanity 
after being brought 
back to civilisation. 
The question of who controls the representation of women and 
men, a key theme in feminist debate in the 1970s, is still worth 
The Bloody Chamber 59 

=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
Wolf-Alice The text 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In his introduction 
to Angela Carter: 
The Rational Glass 
(1998) Aidan Day 
refers to Carter's 
'metaphysical 
materialism', a 
dubious term 
at best, but he 
is correct in 
describing Carter 
as 'fundamentally 
anti-postmodern', 
despite the 
characteristics of her 
writing that other 
critics would ascribe 
to postmodernism: 
'pastiche, 
intertextuality ... 
reflexiveness' (p. 12). 
asking in the twenty-first century. It is a principle of the materialist 
outlook, which Carter adopted and regarded as the only way to 
view the world, that in order to appear to be something over any 
sustained length of time, it is necessary to be it. So appearances, 
images, however deceptive they might be, are important in knowing 
who we are and what we are becoming. That is why the-‘rational 
glass’ (p. 148) is so important to Carter; it is art, it is literature and 
it is life: warts and all. 
GLOSSARY 
140 counterpoint a melody added as an accompaniment to 
another melody 
145 circumambulatory to walk all the way round - also has 
a connotation of 'beating around the bush' in speech, 
or time-wasting 
146 diadem a crown 
147 debutante a young girl making her debut in society, 
an aristocratic tradition of introducing their children 
as candidates for marriage, a ritual of coming of age 
litany a form of chanted prayer, led by a priest, who 
recites a series of petitions to which the congregation 
respond in unison; typically an appeal for divine 
intervention in human affairs 
148 Mycenaean denoting the civilisation of an ancient Greek 
city 
V_2 
Extended commentaries 
Text 1 - The Bloody Chamber, pages 8-11 
From ‘Sea; sand; a sky that melts into the sea’ to ‘And stain you.’ 
The bride’s journey towards her destination is carefully crafted into 
a waking dream of a unique and strange location. Carter’s simile for 
daybreak, ‘a cool dream’ (p. 8), is developed through a sequence of 
references to the narrator’s blurred perception of her surroundings 
and the sense that boundaries and limits are not easily defined in 
this unfamiliar place. The ‘melting’ sea and sky (p. 8) are described 
as if they are the hazy images captured in landscape art through the 
use of pastel colours. The ‘misty’ style of such art is often thought 
60 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
The text Extended commentaries 
to be typically soft, gentle and unfocused; the colour palette and the 
range of contrasting shades and hues employed by the pastel artist 
are typically less vibrant than those of other mediums. Carter deftly 
links the liquidity of this image of the landscape to the ‘deliquescent 
harmonies’ (p. 8) the bride was playing on the piano at the moment 
of her first meeting with her husband. Debussy’s music is meditative 
and tranquil, calm and unthreatening, and the symbolism of 
Debussy as a romantic and gentle depiction of the daydream of love 
is an ironic reminder of how far her ‘reverie’ (p. 8) is removed from 
the reality of the Marquis. 
Although the bride has arrived at her destination, the narrative 
continues to move the reader along on a journey through the 
exterior landscape, through the ‘mysterious, amphibious’ castle (p. 9) 
and through its interior spaces into the personal interior landscape of 
the bride’s psychological state. Carter narrows the focus from a 
wider view of the public and personal personae of the two main 
characters to the private scene of intimate revelation, though this 
is one-sided and not fully enacted in this section of the text. 
The Marquis remains ‘still as a pond iced thickly over’ (p. 9), 
Carter’s simile evoking the coldness of the character’s nature. 
His passivity and inscrutability of expression give way to a ‘weary 
appetite’ when he approaches his ‘familiar treat’ (p. 11), and he 
smiles as he examines his wife. Carter’s description of the ‘rare 
movement’ (p. 11) of his lips makes the Marquis seem incapable 
of expressing human feeling. He is seen to be an ‘old, monocled 
lecher’ controlling this ‘Most pornographic of all confrontations’ 
(p- 11). 
The narrator discovers her place and position in the new life she 
is entering. First she encounters the housekeeper, whose ‘correct 
but lifeless’ greeting, together with the fact that she has been the 
Marquis’s ‘foster mother’ (p. 9), brings to mind the role of the 
wicked stepmother in traditional fairy tales. The bride recognises 
that this person, her social inferior, is really the one in control of 
the enormous ‘ocean liner’ (p. 9) that is the castle, because she 
knows how to do the work necessary for the place to function. 
Next she is led to the bedroom and the grand bed with its imposing 
Gothic decoration of gargoyles; its dark colour scheme of blood 
CONTEXT 
Achille-Claude 
Debussy 
(1862-1918) was a 
French composer 
inspired by the 
Symbolist 
movement. The 
Symbolists formed 
an artistic and 
poetic movement 
in France and 
Belgium in the 
late nineteenth 
century. Their 
focus was on 
spirituality, 
obscurity and 
metaphor, as 
opposed to realism 
and naturalism. 
\_2 
The Bloody Chamber 6l 

=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
Extended commentaries The text 
Text 1 - The Bloody Chamber, pages 8-11 continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In Mary Shelley's 
Frankenstein (1818) 
her creature comes 
to self-knowledge 
through reading. In 
a reference to John 
Milton's Paradise 
Lost (1667), the 
creature states: 
‘Paradise Lost... 
moved every feeling 
of wonder and awe 
that the picture of 
an omnipotent God 
warring with his 
creatures was 
capable of exciting.' 
Carter's main 
monster, the 
Marquis, is neither 
transformed nor 
redeemed through 
his reading. 
QUESTION 
Andrea Dworkin 
(1946-2005) 
wrote against 
pornography in 
Woman Hating: 
A Radical Look at 
Sexuality (1974): 
'Pornography, like 
fairy tale, tells us 
who we are.' In 
what ways does 
this perspective 
emerge in 'The 
Bloody Chamber'? 
red; and its black wood adorned with luxurious gold leaf. She 
realises that her life has changed irrevocably when she notices how 
servants have taken care of things without her noticing. There is 
some ambiguity in the statement ‘Henceforth, a maid would deal 
with everything’ (p. 10). Initially, it is most likely to be understood 
as her recognition that female servants will do all the work. In 
another sense, it foreshadows the way the female characters have to 
take control of their own destinies in order to avoid merely being 
servants of the patriarch. 
The contrast between the characters’ attitudes to desire is marked 
in the vocabulary Carter employs for their description. The bride 
is ‘trembling’ (p. 10) and blushing as the blood rushes to her face. 
These are the cliches of honeymoon behaviour. However, at 
this stage it is not clear whether the bride is blushing with 
embarrassment or flushed with the excitement of desire. The 
Marquis is slow, methodical and teasing as he strips the wrappings 
of his ‘bargain’ to reveal her ‘scarlet, palpitating core’ (p. 11). 
Though Carter’s metaphor is that of an artichoke and, by 
extension, her ‘heart’ is revealed when she is stripped naked, 
it becomes clear exactly what the Marquis has been examining 
before abruptly suspending the ‘ritual from the brothel’ (p. 11). 
The narrator’s statement ‘he closed my legs like a book’ (p. 11) 
shocks not just because the voyeurism of the Marquis is disturbing 
in itself, but also because the bride is equated with his collection of 
pornographic texts, making her nothing more than a text to be read 
or consumed at his pleasure. To him, she is nothing more than an 
object for his pleasure alone. 
The mirrors and the lilies are powerful symbols of the Marquis’s 
control and dominance in this environment. The lilies are associated 
with funeral rites and therefore with death (see Detailed 
summaries: The Bloody Chamber, pages 14-26 for more on the 
connection between marriage and death); the mirrors embody the 
way the ‘male gaze’ operates as part of the objectification of women. 
The Marquis has to amplify the visual opportunities to enhance his 
voyeuristic exploitation of his bride. 
The journey into the character of the narrator is interrupted at the 
point where she experiences a ‘strange, impersonal arousal’ (p. 11). 
62 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
The text Extended commentaries 
This conflicted reaction, her recognition of being aroused despite 
being repulsed by the Marquis, is the ‘stain’ she associates with the 
Marquis through the symbol of the lily pollen. It is a disturbing 
image that connects desire, sex and death. The ending of the tale 
will return explicitly to this idea of shame and ‘stain’, as indelible 
evidence of damaging experience. 
Text 2 - The Erl-King 
‘The Erl-King’ is an adaptation of a European tale that is likely to be 
less familiar to a modern audience, partly because it has not been 
recycled in the animated versions of ‘classic’ tales that dominate so- 
called ‘family entertainment’. It draws heavily on folkloric traditions 
of the Green Man as the personification of nature or the energies of 
spring and so forth (see also Themes: Man, woman and nature). 
The basic shape of the tale is simple: a young girl enters the forest 
and meets with the Erl-King, who transforms young girls into caged 
birds. Despite enjoying the dreamlike rapture of her time with the 
Erl-King, the girl resolves to kill him and release the trapped young 
women. But Carter’s narrative is not so easily reduced to a 
chronological account of events. Of all the stories in the collection, 
‘The Erl-King’ is the most innovative and experimental in its 
narrative form. 
The opening sentence is concerned with the significance of light, 
in both material and metaphorical senses, and contains an allusion 
to the poetry of Emily Dickinson (1830-86), itself influenced 
by Christian scripture. Carter plays with the paradox ‘perfect 
transparency must be impenetrable’ (p. 96), immediately qualifying 
her introductory statements of ‘lucidity’ and ‘clarity’. The visual 
colour scheme - ‘brass-coloured’, ‘sulphur-yellow’, ‘nicotine- 
stained’, ‘russet slime’ - evokes the transition from autumn to 
winter, a hard and dirty season where everything is ‘withered’ 
and ‘discoloured’. The idea of death is drawn out of the natural 
passage of season to season but it is stated as an awareness of the 
impermanent and transitory condition of existence: ‘a haunting 
sense of the imminent cessation of being’ (p. 96). Carter uses the 
annual, cyclical death of nature as a metaphor for mortality. But her 
style of expression is drawn from philosophical literature and hints 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Although the Green 
Man is generally 
depicted as 
benevolent and 
kind, Kathleen 
Basford views the 
Green Man of 
medieval art as a 
demon in her work 
The Green Man 
(1978). 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
Compare the 
opening paragraph 
of The Erl-King' 
with Dickinson's 
poem 'Light is 
sufficient to itself'. 
CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read this 
poem by Dickinson, 
now regarded as a 
major American 
poet, online at 
http://famouspoets 
andpoems.com - 
search for 'Light is 
sufficient to itself' 
in 'Poems'. 
The Bloody Chamber 63 

=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
Extended commentaries The text 
Text 2 - The Erl-King continued 
CONTEXT 
Michaelmas (p. 99), 
29 September, is 
the Feast of St 
Michael in the 
Christian calendar. 
It falls just a few 
days after the 
autumn equinox, 
which marks the 
shortening of 
daylight hours, 
the beginning of 
autumn and the 
approach of 
winter. V___/ 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
Carter alludes to 
Christina Rossetti's 
poem 'Goblin 
Market' (1862) when 
she writes 'Eat me, 
drink me; thirsty, 
cankered, goblin- 
ridden' (p. 102). In 
this poem one sister 
succumbs to the 
temptations of the 
'goblin merchant 
men'; the other 
resists. The latter 
exclaims: 'Eat me, 
drink me, love me; / 
Laura ... / For your 
sake I have braved 
the glen / And had 
to do with goblin 
merchant men.' 
Recognising her 
sister's courage, the 
errant Laura asks 
whether her sister 
must be 'ruined' too: 
'Thirsty, cankered, 
goblin-ridden'. 
64 The Bloody Chamber 
at a more universal sense of total annihilation, where everything 
ceases to exist: ‘All will fall still, all lapse’ (p. 97). 
The narrative voice is constantly shifting through this tale; the 
reader is positioned by this shifting perspective in various ways 
with unsettling effect. The narrative cohesion is maintained by a 
sense of the tale continuing from moment to moment, but it is 
clearly not a chronological account of delineated incidents or 
events in sequence. The sharp edges of space and time become 
blurred as Carter’s ‘wood swallows you up’ (p. 96). The narrative 
voice is partially established by distanced recount or description in 
the third person and past tense register, but moves through direct 
address in the second person to become a wholly involved first 
person narrative account from the perspective of the female 
protagonist. Carter also shifts between past, present and future 
tenses; the tale never settles into one narrative mode and the effect 
is both disorienting and entrancing. 
The threatening presence in the metaphorical wood becomes clear 
in a repeated phrase that acts as an almost poetic refrain: ‘Erl-King 
will do you grievous harm’ (p. 97). The dangerous creature or spirit 
Carter introduces as something that ‘came alive from the desire of 
the woods’ (p. 98) is a mocking and cruel embodiment of nature. 
His ‘white, pointed teeth’ (p. 99) immediately recall deadly 
predators, whether they be real wolves or imaginary vampires. In 
terms of symbols, objects that carry powerful meaning and suggest 
connotations, the central one for this tale is the ‘old fiddle’ (p. 99) 
with its broken strings. The image conjures concepts of neglect and 
abuse alongside the possibility of harmony. Its presence next to the 
caged birds representing the trapped female spirit offers some 
uncertain hope of restoration and liberation from the patriarch’s 
‘pretty cages’ (p. 102). 
The narration slips into rhapsody as the enchantment of the Erl- 
King becomes manifest in the sexually languorous and indulgent 
communion of being ‘goblin-ridden’ (p. 102). The narrator 
becomes a ‘stream’ and ‘like a skinned rabbit’ as she is stripped to 
her ‘last nakedness’ (p. 102). The joyous indulgence in nature is 
accompanied by a ‘terrible fear’ of entrapment (p. 103), though 
the Erl-King is loved and credited with ‘innocence’ regarding the 

=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
I 
The text Extended commentaries 
impact of his carefully constructed cages on the ‘birds’ they 
constrain (p. 103). When the narrator imagines herself killing the 
Erl-King, Carter employs an image used in ‘The Bloody Chamber’: 
long hair, a symbol of female beauty and masculine strength, wound 
around the neck in strangulation. 
The tale ends with a vision of the future: the woman will liberate the 
trapped ‘young girls’ and enable the ‘old fiddle’ to play music once 
again (p. 104). But the hope of harmony is replaced by ‘discordant’ 
cries of a male voice. The last sentence of the story - ‘Mother, 
mother, you have murdered me!’ - twists the relationship of the 
narrator and the Erl-King into another dimension; the effect is 
startling and provocative. 
Text 3 - The Werewolf 
Carter takes the fairy tale ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ for an outing 
in a different form in this story of inter-generational female 
rivalry. Whereas in other tales the wolf or animal is a predatory 
representation of male sexuality or patriarchal tyranny, here the 
wolf is the embodiment of the preceding generation of mothers. 
This is another perspective on the female experience as a socially 
constructed set of expectations - to marry, have children and never 
be independent - that succeeding generations are often required to 
acknowledge and accept. 
Carter prepares the ground for the tale by emphasising the link 
between the environment and the characteristics of the inhabitants 
of the ‘northern country’ (p. 126). This invites the reader to identify, 
through pathetic fallacy, the reflection of the people’s ‘cold hearts’ 
in the ‘cold weather’. The narrator seems rather condescending 
towards the people, implying that their beliefs are naive or merely 
ignorant superstition: ‘the Devil holds picnics in the graveyards and 
invites the witches’; garlic keeps vampires away; the mysterious 
power of ‘second sight’ is granted by difficult and particular 
circumstances of birth; and old women are stoned to death for being 
witches (p. 126). The reader is invited to view such cruel behaviour 
as a characteristic of people with simplistic beliefs: the ‘crude icon of 
the virgin’ (p. 126) symbolises their dogmatism and lack of worldly 
understanding. 
CHECK 
THE NET 
Rossetti (1830-94) 
was a writer 
favoured by the 
attention of feminist 
critics during the 
1970s, and 'Goblin 
Market' is often 
interpreted as a 
feminist view of 
female sexuality. The 
end can be 
interpreted as a 
feminist tribute to 
solidarity with other 
women as sisters. 
You can read 'Goblin 
Market' online at 
www.victorian 
web.org 
CONTEXT 
Dsemonologie 
(1597) by James VI 
of Scotland was 
published as his 
investigation of 
witchcraft. 
His personal 
involvement in trials 
of witches in 
Scotland before 
becoming James I 
of England in 1603 
explains their 
prominence in 
Shakespeare's 
Macbeth (1606). 
James had 
explained in his 
book why witches 
were mostly 
women; it was 
because they, like 
the biblical Eve, 
were 'frail' and 
more open to 
temptation. 
\_ 
The Bloody Chamber 65 

=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
Extended commentaries The text 
Text 3 - The Werewolf continued 
CONTEXT 
In German folklore 
Walpurgisnacht 
(p. 126) is the 
night before May 
Day, when witches 
are believed to 
gather in places 
such as the 
Brocken,the 
highest point 
of the Harz 
Mountains in 
the north, and 
celebrate the 
arrival of spring 
with satanic revels 
and lustful 
dancing. 
V___/ 
CONTEXT 
Witchcraft trials 
continued long 
after the reign of 
James I of England; 
the last person to 
be executed for 
witchcraft in 
England was 
Alice Molland in 
1684. European 
persecution of 
women for the 
alleged crimes and 
heresy of witchcraft 
did not come to an 
end until the 
eighteenth century. 
V_/ 
Carter then turns this perspective on its head by telling a tale 
of a shape-shifting witch that ends with her execution by being 
stoned to death. Carter does not overplay the resonances of this 
form of execution as a particularly masculine revenge on women 
(prescribed as punishment for adultery in ancient Christian texts). 
Carter’s ‘Winter and cold weather’ (p. 127) alludes to Shakespeare’s 
mockery of the pastoral idyll of rustic simplicity in As You Like It 
(c. 1599-1600), where exiled noblemen sing reassuring verses about 
the freedom of the forest, their conceit being that there is ‘no 
enemy’ in the forest but ‘winter and rough weather’ (Act II Scene 
5). Carter has been hinting that the enemies of these simple ‘upland 
woodsmen’ (p. 126) are non-existent, but this linking allusion 
signals there is more to the forest dangers than the mere discomfort 
of the weather. 
The ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ tale emerges from this introductory 
preamble through Germanic lore relating to witchcraft. The young 
girl is equipped with her ‘father’s hunting knife’ (p. 127) for 
protection and she is skilled in its use. The absence of the father 
is not explained, and the phallic symbolism of the knife as the 
representation of a masculine strength is not emphasised. The 
weapon becomes ‘her knife’ as she turns to face her attacker. The 
encounter with the wolf and the second encounter with the injured 
grandmother show the ‘child’ to be strong and able to defend 
herself. The conflict is resolved by the young woman summoning 
her neighbours to her aid. The conclusion of the tale, after the 
grandmother-witch-wolf has been stoned to death, is a swiftly 
rendered ‘happy ever after’: she takes over her grandmother’s 
house and ‘she prospered’ (p. 128). Carter’s ending suggests that, 
whatever the mistakes of previous generations, it may be possible 
for this generation of women to benefit from their ancestors’ 
wealth of experience without, metaphorically speaking, 
inheriting their dangerous shape-shifting tendencies - in 
other words, without having to pretend to be what they 
are not. 
66 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
The text Extended commentaries 
Text 4 - The Lady of the House of Love, 
pages 113-16 
From cAt the mauvish beginnings of evening’ to ‘all the freshness 
of morning’. 
The young hero arrives at the abandoned and ruined village as the 
day is ending. Carter has just indicated a turning point in the tale 
by the use of the giant’s threatening couplet from ‘Jack and the 
Beanstalk’. The young man approaching is both Jack the Giant- 
Killer and the handsome prince rescuing the princess. He is the 
lady’s fortune as told in the cards: ‘love and death’ (p. 112). 
Carter has the hero arrive at the end of his quest ‘hot, hungry, 
thirsty, weary, dusty’ (p. 113). He has struggled to come ‘a great 
way’ to this place, and he is momentarily disappointed by the 
‘uninhabited’ village with its roofs ‘caved in’, ‘fallen tiles’ and 
‘shutters hanging disconsolately’. The hero’s ‘faint unease’ is not an 
awareness of the ‘foul secrets’ of the place, as he is not ‘sufficiently 
imaginative’ to see beyond the ‘poignant brightness of the 
hollyhocks’ and ‘the beauty of the flaming sunset’ (p. 113). 
The hero is drawn towards the mansion by the housekeeper’s 
mirned invitation through the ‘obscene ... excess’ (p. 114) of the 
‘jungle’ of red roses. Here his actions mimic those of the handsome 
prince in ‘Sleeping Beauty’, who has to hack his way into the castle 
through thickets of thorn. The imagery is inverted, as the roses in 
this tale are not a barrier; they intoxicate with their ‘heavy scent’ 
(p. 113) and, of course, as the symbol of romantic love, invite and 
welcome the hero. 
Carter is once again taking the protagonist hero from the exterior 
of an ‘immense, rambling’ (p. 114) ruin into the intimate heart of 
a private chamber. The man is reminded of ‘ghost stories’ but 
dismisses his memories as ‘fancies’. His refusal to participate in 
imaginary terrors protects him from danger: he is ‘no child’ (p. 114). 
Carter sets out the definitive characteristic of his masculinity as a 
rejection of childhood and of imagination. In his patriarchal view 
of the world, such irrational things have no place and therefore must 
CONTEXT 
In the fairy tale 
'Jack the Giant- 
Killer' the hero 
has four magical 
possessions: a coat 
that makes him 
invisible; shoes 
that make him 
impossible to 
overtake; a cap 
that gives him 
unlimited 
knowledge; and 
a sword that 
slices through 
everything. 
v _/ 
The Bloody Chamber 67 

=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
Extended commentaries The text 
Text 4 - The Lady of the House of Love, Pages 113-16 continued 
CONTEXT 
The expression 'the 
lady of the house' 
has been in use since 
the nineteenth 
century to refer 
to the bourgeois 
housewife. It has 
become an archaic 
euphemism for 
a woman who 
remains without an 
independent career 
or income after 
marriage. Carter 
is emphasising 
the limitations 
of marriage for 
women. V___/ 
QUESTION 
If sex and the fear 
of death are 
Carter's material 
and psychological 
concerns in these 
stories, why are 
they particularly 
thought of as 
feminist tales? 
be dismissed. His position as a junior patriarch is dependent on his 
mature, rational, masculine logic. His ‘virginity’ acts as a ‘pentacle’, 
a magic charm to ward off the evil he is approaching so unawares. It 
is also Carter’s joking allusion to the identity of his character being 
an analogue for Prince Charming. Here the charm of sexuality is 
reversed; whereas Prince Charming draws Sleeping Beauty to him 
through his physical appearance, the soldier is unknowingly 
protected from the beautiful vampire by his innocent chivalry. He is 
brought through ‘melodramatically creaking hinges’ to a ‘lightless, 
cavernous interior’ (p. 114). Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland is 
recalled by the use of the grammatically incorrect comparative 
phrase ‘Curiouser and curiouser’ (p. 114), and again the hero 
dismisses his ‘childish lack of enthusiasm’ (p. 115) for the place. 
Called to his doom, the hero is the epitome of understated English 
implacability as he tidies himself to meet the ‘more elevated member 
of the household’ (p. 115). Carter underscores this point by 
mentioning his ‘tweed jacket’, an item of clothing synonymous 
with the English aristocracy. 
As he approaches the inner sanctum, the ‘ruinous ... interior’ is 
briefly described: ‘worm-eaten ... crumbling’ (p. 115). The choice 
of adjectives connects with the general atmosphere of death and 
decay. Though it is a misapprehension that after death the human 
body is eaten by worms or crumbles to dust, as in fact the corpse is 
consumed from within by bacteria already present in the body, the 
associations of these images are culturally compelling. Once again 
the interior of the Gothic location is represented as a labyrinth of 
‘endless corridors’, ‘winding staircases’ and ‘galleries’ of ‘family 
portraits’. Carter’s playful characterisation of the hero’s tendency 
to underestimate danger is embedded in the understatement that 
the vampire family portraits are ‘of a quite memorable beastliness’ 
(p. 115). 
The hero’s approach is halted at the final door, its significance 
signalled by the deliberately melodramatic use of the 
‘harpsichord’ (p. 115), a distinctively baroque instrument, 
sometimes also known as a virginal. The ‘liquid cascade’ of the 
vampire’s pet songbird disarms the hero completely as he waits to 
enter ‘Juliet’s tomb’ (p. 116). Carter’s reference to Shakespeare’s 
68 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
The text Extended commentaries 
Romeo and Juliet (c. 1595) reminds us that the vampire is neither 
alive nor dead, in the same way that Juliet in her drugged state is 
both alive and dead to different characters at the end of the play. 
‘Juliet’s tomb’ is also the place where the ‘star-crossed lovers’ die, 
as Romeo in his grief is unable to recognise that Juliet is only 
sleeping. The irony that the virginal Prince Charming enjoys 
the ‘freshness of morning’ (p. 116) on the threshold of a tomb 
encapsulates his naive masculinity. 
QUESTION 
Gothic texts 
convey a sense of 
fear and terror: 
does Carter 
achieve this in The 
Bloody Chamber? 
The Bloody Chamber 69 

=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
Part Three 
Critical approaches 
CONTEXT 
Brewer's Dictionary 
of Phrase and 
Fable (seventeenth 
edition, 2007) 
notes that in 
German legend 
the erl-king is 'a 
malevolent goblin 
who haunts forests 
and lures people, 
especially children, 
to destruction. ... 
Erlking means 
"king of the 
alders" but has 
popularly been 
understood to 
mean "elf king".' 
v_ J 
CONTEXT 
Legends 
concerning shape- 
shifters can be 
found in many 
cultures. Whether 
it be the Celtic 
selkie or the 
Native American 
Nanabozho or the 
Greek Zeus, the 
notion that the 
world cannot 
be trusted is 
expressed in many 
ways. Occasionally 
the shape-shifter is 
benign, but more 
often than not the 
monster is selfish 
and mostly malign, 
v____/ 
Characterisation 
It is partly the nature of the short story as a narrative form for 
characters to be defined by the use of carefully selected detail. 
Carter is not creating her characters from a blank sheet; many of 
the characters in this collection are stock characters from fairy-tale 
convention dressed in new clothes. Some are amalgamations of a 
wider variety of recognisable character types drawn from other 
literary genres. The Erl-King is the most singular character in the 
tales as a whole; he is a kind of pagan wood spirit, elusively 
representing a complex combination of ideas about nature (see 
Extended commentaries: Text 2 and Themes: Man, woman and 
nature for more on ‘The Erl-King’). Carter allows some of the 
characters to perform the role of narrator, though none of them 
tell their stories in exactly the same way. Transformation and 
metamorphosis are the key functions of Carter’s characters: some 
are shape-shifters; others are disguised or masked in one way or 
another. The revelation of the true identity of Carter’s characters is 
often accomplished through a thoroughly other-worldly moment 
of magic. 
The women in The Bloody Chamber are in general given domestic 
roles without economic definition, whether they be aristocrats, 
petits bourgeois or peasants. The men are mostly figures of 
authority whose power or wealth has been inherited in one way or 
another. These Notes will consider together those who take the role 
of narrator and protagonist; the villainous patriarchs and the male 
characters who are predators; the male characters who are less 
threatening; the positive and negative models of motherhood; 
the few female characters who may be seen as victims of their 
circumstances; the female characters that represent the vivacity of 
life; and the clearest example Carter gives of the attractions and 
reciprocal identities of the human animal. 
70 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
Critical approaches Characterisation 
The narrator protagonist 
A protagonist is usually taken to be the first character to act or 
the principal character causing most of the events in a story to be 
enacted. The question of who has the initiative at any moment in 
her stories is one that Carter returns to again and again. She wants 
to show who has the power to make things happen. The new bride 
in ‘The Bloody Chamber’, the girl in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ and the 
eponymous character in ‘Puss-in-Boots’ all narrate the events of 
their stories as a first person narrative. Each of these narrators could 
not be more different, however. 
The bride of ‘The Bloody Chamber’ recalls the process by which 
her innocence was stripped away from her. She introduces her 
experience as a sequence of remembered moments. Her narration 
begins with a flashback through linked memories (on the train, 
thinking of her mother alone at home, the delivery of the wedding 
dress, the courtship, going to the opera on the night before her 
wedding), though the tale generally follows a traditional 
chronological recounting of events. She is a creature of sensations, 
delighting in the description of the ‘impeccable linen of the pillow’ 
(p. 1); the gift of her mother’s black silk dress ‘with the dull, 
prismatic sheen of oil on water’ (p. 1); her satin nightdress, ‘supple 
as a garment of heavy water’ (p. 2); and the Marquis’s kiss ‘with 
tongue and teeth in it’ (p. 2). She questions the appearance of things 
around her, being particularly attracted to the Marquis by the 
disturbing, ‘absolute absence of light’ in his eyes and the notion that 
his face ‘seemed ... like a mask’ (p. 3). She only glimpses sight of the 
truth about the Marquis - and herself - in ‘gilded mirrors’: ‘And I 
saw myself, suddenly, as he saw me’ (p. 6). In the many mirrors set 
in ‘stately frames of contorted gold’ that surround the Marquis’s 
bed she becomes a ‘multitude of girls’, a ‘harem’ for the Marquis 
to enjoy (p. 10). She reports the moment of consummation of her 
marriage through the reflections in the mirrors, as if she only exists 
in the Marquis’s frame of vision. 
When left alone, her idle existence as a rich man’s wife is oppressive. 
The creative act of making music is her escape, her gift of self¬ 
creation and self-realisation. After she has discovered the truth of 
the secret room, she copes with the imminent threat to her life by 
adopting the ‘therapeutic task’ (p. 30) of playing some challenging 
CHECK 
THE NET 
Visit http://en.thmk 
exist.com for a wide 
range of quotations 
from Carter. Go to 
'Authors'; writers 
are listed 
alphabetically by 
first names. 
The Bloody Chamber 71 

=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
Characterisation Critical approaches 
The narrator protagonist continued 
CONTEXT 
The saying The 
lion shall lie down 
with the lamb' is 
an adaptation 
from the Old 
Testament: The 
wolf also shall 
dwell with the 
lamb, and the 
leopard shall lie 
down with the kid' 
(Isaiah 11:6). The 
Quaker William 
Penn (1644-1718) 
wrote in 1693: 'Nor 
is it said the lamb 
shall lie down with 
the lion, but the 
lion shall lie down 
with the lamb.' 
Between 1830 and 
1840 the Quaker 
artist Edward Hicks 
(1780-1849) 
painted a series 
of scenes entitled 
The Peaceable 
Kingdom inspired 
by these verses. V____ 
music by Bach. She remains an odd combination of fearlessness and 
resignation - ‘I knew I must meet my lord alone’ (p. 33) - dependent 
on her mother, her ‘avenging angel’ (p. 39), for her salvation. 
The girl in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ is immediately presented as a tougher 
personality, a survivor who chooses her experiences carefully, but is 
equally powerless in many respects. She resents the way she is 
unable to prevent her circumstances growing steadily worse under 
her father’s neglect. She describes his ‘special madness’ (p. 56), his 
‘debauchery’ (p. 59), as the ‘sickness’ (p. 59) of gambling. Her 
disappointment in her father is clear as she lists the items of the 
‘king’s ransom’ (p. 59) that prompted him to gamble her away. 
Her ‘heartless mirth’ in response to The Beast’s request to see 
her ‘Desnuda’ (p. 65) is the response of a person hardened by 
experience. Although she initially feels she is part of a ‘humiliating 
bargain’ (p. 68), she changes her view when The Beast changes his 
demand. Carter alludes to the well-known axiom that anticipates an 
improbable reconciliation between the powerful and the powerless: 
‘The lion shall lie down with the lamb.’ Typically, Carter’s woman 
understands this by turning it around: ‘The lamb must learn to run 
with the tigers’ (p. 71). The anthropomorphic transformation 
she undergoes at the end of the tale is a remarkable compromise. 
She rejects the values of her father’s civilisation but confirms the 
possibility of a ‘peaceable kingdom’ (p. 74) by becoming the tiger’s 
bride and rejoicing in the revelation of her ‘beautiful fur’ (p. 75). 
Puss-in-Boots is an anthropomorphic caricature of masculine 
opportunism, and an amusing buffoon who boasts he is ‘a cat of the 
world, cosmopolitan, sophisticated’ (‘Puss-in-Boots’, p. 76). His 
narrative voice is in the manner of an old theatrical bore. He 
relishes his role as a raconteur and his language is overloaded with 
rhetorical flourishes, particularly when embellishing his part in the 
story. He refers to Shakespeare’s Hamlet (1601) when he says cats 
‘smile and smile’ (p. 77). Carter neatly connects politicians - ‘all cats 
have a politician’s air’ (p. 77) - and ‘villains’ (p. 78) through this 
allusion to Hamlet’s bitter observation that ‘one may smile and 
smile and be a villain’ (Act I Scene 5). He often refers to himself in 
the third person - ‘Puss takes his promenade’ or ‘Puss can perform 
a back somersault’ (p. 77) - a habit often taken as a sign of 
egocentricity. 
72 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
Critical approaches Characterisation 
In one respect, it is misleading to call Puss-in-Boots a protagonist, 
as the real protagonist, the ‘sleek, spry tabby’ (p. 82), is hidden in 
his story. Puss-in-Boots claims all the credit, but the success of 
his ventures has, in fact, entirely depended on the tabby cat’s 
wily perspicacity and resourcefulness. Without her ‘keening 
encouragement’ (p. 84) Puss-in Boots would have not have jumped 
up to the lady’s windowsill; the tabby feeds him and arranges the 
rats in the house according to her scheme to bring the lovers 
together; the ‘shadow-camouflaged young tabby’ (p. 92) disposes 
of the old man. She also finds time to provide this ‘proud’ Puss with 
three ‘fine, new-minted ginger kittens’ (p. 95). The old feminist jibe 
that history should be rewritten as herstoxy is brought to mind by 
this tale. This also raises the question of why Carter chose not to 
bring the tabby cat forward as narrator. There may not be a better 
answer than Carter’s own view of the pleasure of storytelling: that 
as storyteller she could ‘suit herself’. 
The predatory patriarch and the absent 
FATHER 
The Marquis in ‘The Bloody Chamber’ and the Count in ‘The Snow 
Child’ are manifestations of extreme cruelty. The exercise of their 
power and authority is the opposite of the weakness and 
pusillanimity of the aristocratic father in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ and 
the businessman father in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’. There is a 
Comparison here that seems to suggest an aristocratic patriarch is 
more powerful and dangerous than a bourgeois patriarch. Whether 
powerful or weak, however, they are all patriarchs, in other words 
male heads of a family or household. Carter presents no positive 
model of the father in these tales. 
The most dangerous patriarch of all, the Marquis, combines the 
inherited wealth and position of the aristocrat with the power of the 
bourgeois financier. The Marquis, his title alone being an obvious 
and derivative reference to the Marquis de Sade (who gave his name 
to an entire range of activities considered to be beyond the norms of 
sexual behaviour), represents selfish indulgence. He is a dangerous 
and menacing predator. The narrator compares him to a lily and 
almost immediately describes that flower as ‘cobra-headed’ (p. 3). 
By extension, the cold-blooded, reptilian nature of the Marquis is 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Bride of 
Frankenstein (1935), 
directed by James 
Whales, provides an 
iconic depiction of 
Frankenstein's 
creature and his 
bride as monstrous 
representations of 
'man' and 'woman'. 
Carter's Marquis is 
an inverted form 
of Frankenstein, 
creating not 
monstrous 
imitations of life 
but precisely 
manufactured 
female tableaux of 
death. His bride is 
moulded into the 
image he desires. 
The Bloody Chamber 73 

=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
Characterisation Critical approaches 
The predatory patriarch and the absent father continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Re-Visiting Angela 
Carter: Texts, 
Contexts, Intertexts 
(2006), edited by 
Rebecca Munford, 
includes Gina 
Wisker's view that 
'Incest terrifies and 
disgusts the 
conventional, and 
those who seek to 
control, because 
it recognises 
sameness' ('Behind 
Locked Doors: 
Angela Carter, 
Horror and the 
Influence of Edgar 
Allan Poe'). 
CONTEXT 
Melodrama was 
a popular 
nineteenth-century 
theatrical genre 
known for its 
moralistic plots 
that often 
reflected the 
reality of class 
conflict in Britain 
in sensational 
forms. Typically 
predatory 
aristocrats 
menaced beautiful 
young women 
who were then 
rescued by the 
handsome hero. 
v_ 
formed alongside more obvious references to his ‘leonine’ (p. 2) 
head with its ‘dark mane’ (p. 3). He has the ability to move with the 
stealth of a hunter, creeping coldly around ‘as if his footfall turned 
the carpet into snow’ (p. 3). He is a serial killer and torturer of 
women. One of Carter’s most provocative acts in these stories as 
a whole is to make his female prey respond to his attentions with 
arousal. But this character is incapable of considering the possibility 
of female fulfilment. For the Marquis, sex is an act performed on 
another body, not something shared with another person. He rejects 
his prey as soon as there is evidence of mature independent 
sexuality. One could even argue he is the patriarch as child abuser, 
the deepest and darkest betrayal of the father’s role. This idea is 
hinted at when the narrator links the aroma of the Marquis’s cigars, 
‘a warm fug of Havana’ (p. 7), with ‘little girl’ memories of her 
father ‘before he kissed me and left me’ (p. 7). 
The Count of ‘The Snow Child’ is an equally repellent figure, 
indulging his desires far beyond any notion of acceptable 
behaviour. Carter’s sardonic comment on his sexual prowess - 
‘he was soon finished’ (p. 106) - shows the short-lived nature 
of his virility and undermines the power that his sexuality 
might have. 
The Duke in ‘Wolf-Alice’, yet another aristocrat, is completely 
indifferent to himself as a monster because he cannot see himself as 
others see him without the care and support of Wolf-Alice. Here 
Carter is using the device of a wolf-mad man, with no real character, 
to show how identities can be transformed through care and 
sensitive compromise. 
Carter’s patriarchs generally offer two models of the father: tyrant 
or traitor. Mr Lyon, the Beast in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’, is a 
manipulator. His courtship of Beauty is conducted through the 
father, as would be expected in the traditional patriarchal manner, 
but he persuades Beauty’s father to hand over his daughter through 
economic blackmail and ensures Beauty returns to him through the 
emotional equivalent. His decision to starve to death in her absence 
is reminiscent of self-pitying, jilted lovers who threaten suicide as a 
form of manipulation. He recovers his appetite swiftly enough on 
her return. 
74 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
I 
Critical approaches Characterisation 
The impoverished nobleman of ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ and the ruined 
businessman of ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ are examples of the 
absent father, the father who fails to provide for and then abandons 
his child: a common enough villain in folklore and myth alike. Both 
characters put business affairs and riches ahead of their real 
‘treasures’ (‘The Tiger’s Bride’, p. 60), their daughters. 
The innocent male 
A few of Carter’s male characters are relatively innocent in 
comparison with the more obviously predatory examples of 
patriarchy. The piano-tuner of ‘The Bloody Chamber’ is blind. 
He is helpless and non-threatening; he listens; he is supportive 
and gentle. He is also unable to see the evidence of his lover’s past 
transgressions, which can be seen as a very forgiving and unusual 
trait in a man. Carter has created, with the strategic choice of his 
disability, a model of the male that was to be echoed in media and 
marketing hype in the early 1980s as a ‘new man’, a caring type who 
was not threatened by women’s empowerment. As Polly Toynbee 
wryly observed in the Guardian: ‘The New Man is not here, and it 
does not seem likely that we shall see him in our lifetime, nor in our 
children’s’ (6 November 1987). It remains unclear whether this was 
a masculine or feminist ideal, or whether this model ever really 
was compatible with typically heterosexual views of masculinity. 
The soldier in ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ typifies the 
bumbling, if well-intentioned, idiot who messes up the world 
for a woman. His defining characteristic is ‘lack of imagination’ 
(p. 120). Given that the imagination is so important to Carter, such 
a fundamental human quality, it makes this ‘blond beauty’ (p. 114) 
appear almost inhumanly dull. 
The matriarch 
The mother in ‘The Bloody Chamber’, the Countess in ‘The Snow 
Child’, the werewolf in ‘The Werewolf’ and the eponymous heroine 
in ‘Wolf-Alice’ are Carter’s devices for exploring the dimensions of 
the role of motherhood and the relationship of women to other 
women. The pianist’s mother has all the traits of a masculine hero 
from the world of adventure stories: she shoots wild animals, she 
fights off pirates and generally has had an adventurous past. Carter 
CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read 
Toynbee's article 
online at 
http://century. 
guardian.co.uk - 
search for 'The 
incredible, shrinking 
New Man'. 
The Bloody Chamber 75 

=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
Characterisation Critical approaches 
The matriarch continued 
CONTEXT 
In Greek 
mythology 
Nemesis was 
the goddess of 
retribution or 
vengeance, 
believed to be the 
daughter of Nox, 
the night. An 
unforgiving deity 
who punished 
mortals, 
particularly 
those who set 
themselves against 
the gods, she 
avenged their 
crimes and 
administered 
justice. v _/ 
also makes her a capable nurse, something more commonly thought 
of as a passive female role, but here given equal status with more 
conventionally heroic deeds. She is also equipped with ‘maternal 
telepathy’ (p. 41) - Carter avoids using the patronising and cliched 
phrase ‘feminine intuition’ - so she is the very model of feminist 
virtue. She is an empowered mother, taking on the conventionally 
male roles of the capable parent and rescuer of distressed females. 
She is romantic, having ‘gladly, scandalously, defiantly beggared 
herself for love’ (p. 2). As a widow, she is ‘magnificently eccentric’ 
(p. 2) in black silk. Carter is presenting an all-action female who 
is not obliged to abandon her femininity to compete with men. 
At the beginning, Carter seems to suggest that this is all part of her 
wild youth, an ‘adventurous girlhood’ (p. 1) she has grown out 
of by becoming a mother. But her reappearance at the end of the 
tale, crashing through the waves on horseback with her ‘black 
skirts tucked up around her waist’ (p. 38), is even more romantic 
and glamorous. The wild and wind-blown image of the mother, 
‘black lisle legs exposed to the thigh’ astride a ‘rearing horse’ 
(p. 40), also identifies her with the power of the natural elements. 
She is the Marquis’s nemesis, the embodiment of ‘furious justice’ 
(p. 40). 
The Countess of ‘The Snow Child’ is a more complex examination 
of the mother role, and she is closer to the fairy-tale figure of the 
wicked stepmother, in so far as the child is not her daughter but is 
‘conceived’, as it were, by the Count. Carter examines through the 
Countess’s actions the jealousies involved in competing for male 
attention with another woman. The symbols of her sexual appeal, 
the furs and riding boots, are transferred to the child despite the 
Countess’s efforts to shake off her rival. The rose, as a symbol of 
romance, is a dangerous weapon in her hands. Having ensured 
the death of the Count’s child, she is once more in control of the 
situation, highlighted in the way she restrains her ‘stamping mare’ 
(p. 106). Carter uses a sensual gesture of possessiveness to indicate 
the Countess’s reassertion of her position and identity: ‘With her 
long hand, she stroked her furs’ (p. 106). 
76 The Bloody Chamber 
The wolf’s transformation into the grandmother in ‘The Werewolf’ 
is a particularly disturbing image of the difficult relationship 
between different generations of women. The child’s dramatic 

=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
Critical approaches Characterisation 
discovery that the wolf’s severed paw has become ‘a hand 
toughened with work and freckled with old age’ (p. 127) shows 
her learning that she cannot trust or respect women of previous 
generations who have taken on the role created for them by men. 
Carter’s description of the matriarch as ‘crone’, ‘old woman’ and 
‘witch’ (p. 126) is a mirror image of the tyrannical patriarch. The 
child’s act of resistance transforms her circumstances. Her ‘hard 
life’, part of the cold pattern of ‘Harsh, brief, poor lives’ (p. 126) in 
a difficult and hostile climate, becomes less difficult; the tale ends 
with the simple announcement that ‘she prospered’ (p. 128). Carter 
seems to be suggesting that each generation of women has to free 
itself not only from the tyranny of patriarchal society, but also 
from women whose identity and nature have been warped by men 
into something monstrous. 
The eponymous character in the story of ‘Wolf-Alice’ is an 
exploration of the idea of natural impulses in relation to stereotypes 
such as the ‘maternal instinct’. Stripped of the inhibitions of 
civilisation, Wolf-Alice finds her own way of growing into a role 
which seems to be part daughter, part lover and part mother, with 
no clear distinction. Carter describes Wolf-Alice’s ‘tender gravity’ 
(p. 148) as she heals the wounds of the Duke at the end of the story, 
enabling him to be seen as himself again. 
The victim 
Angela Carter was particularly interested in the portrayal of women 
as victims of male aggression as a limiting factor in the feminist 
perspective of the time. Her argument was that women need not 
accept that role, and she uses these stories to explore how that may 
be achieved. 
Aside from her role as narrator, the bride in ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ is passive and compliant in the abuse that is planned 
by the Marquis. This is one aspect of Carter’s examination of the 
nature of sadomasochistic relationships, and it is related to her 
controversial views on the writings of the Marquis de Sade 
(see Contemporary approaches: Feminism). The character 
is a submissive woman who enables Carter to explore the 
attractions of dominance as part of the sexual dynamics of human 
CONTEXT 
Simone de Beauvoir 
in her essay 'Must 
We Burn Sade?' 
(originally published 
in 1951-2 in Les 
Temps Modernes 
as 'Faut-il bruler 
Sade?', reprinted as 
an introduction to 
an edition of the 
Marquis de Sade's 
The One Hundred 
and Twenty Days of 
Sodom and Other 
Writings) writes: 
'Never in his stories 
does sensual 
pleasure appear as 
self-forgetfulness, 
swooning, or 
abandon. ... The 
male aggression of 
the Sadean hero 
is never softened 
by the usual 
transformation of 
the body into flesh. 
He never... loses 
himself for an 
instant in his animal 
nature' (1990, p. 21). 
V___ 
The Bloody Chamber 77 

=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
Characterisation Critical approaches 
The victim continued 
relationships. The extent to which she might be seen as a willing 
victim is delineated by Carter. The young wife does not know what 
she is dealing with, despite her claim that she is ‘innocent but not 
naive’ (p. 13). 
Beauty in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ is a worrier, an obedient 
daughter who becomes a ‘spoiled child’ (p. 52) and then, at last, 
is redeemed as a prodigal daughter. She transfers her love for 
her father to the Beast so she can ‘come home’ (p. 54). She is 
clearly manipulated, first by her father and then by Mr Lyon, 
courted into surrendering what little independent will she 
possesses. Her most defining characteristic, more significant 
than the ‘invincible prettiness’ (p. 52) to which her beauty is 
degraded through self-indulgence, is her ‘desolating emptiness’ 
(p. 51). 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In Oscar Wilde's 
Gothic melodrama 
The Picture of 
Dorian Gray 
(first published in 
Lippincott's Monthly 
Magazine in 1890), 
Dorian Gray sells 
his soul for eternal 
youth and beauty. 
Year after year 
his unchanging 
features retain the 
appearance of 
innocence and 
beauty, while his 
portrait ages and 
takes on the 
ravages of his 
debauchery. 
The Count’s ‘child of his desire’ (p. 105) in ‘The Snow Child’ is 
a male fantasy who vanishes almost as soon as she is called into 
existence; she is the ideal woman of male fantasy, unrealisable and 
impossible to compete with. Yet she is vulnerable to the symbolic 
touch of love, and she falls victim to ‘the thorn’ (p. 106) which 
represents the painful aspects of human emotion. 
The vampire Countess in ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ is 
trapped in a limbo-like existence of permanent youthful beauty. 
She cannot age. Her release from this empty ‘imitation of life’ 
(p. 110) and her ‘balked tenderness’ (p. 122) is an accident of fate; 
she experiences the ‘pain’ (p. 123) of being human - for Carter, 
to be human is to suffer feelings for others - and then she dies. 
But the tale begins by presenting her as a predator. Carter is adept 
at exploring how seeming opposites can be transformed into one 
another. Her intended victim, the ‘handsome bicyclist’ (p. 121), 
unwittingly seals her doom. Carter shows how hunter and hunted 
are interchangeable roles. The idea of the victim is enlarged at the 
end of this story to include the millions who perished in the First 
World War. The imaginary terrors of Gothic monstrosity are 
dwarfed in comparison with the real and unimaginable horrors 
of the trenches in France. 
78 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
Critical approaches Characterisation 
The independent woman 
Most of Carter’s characters are defined by their relationships to 
others, whether it be as daughter, wife, mother, lover, husband or 
father. But Carter uses these stories to explore the feminist notion 
of a female identity existing independently of, and not limited by, 
male identity. 
Aside from the narrators of ‘The Bloody Chamber’ and ‘The 
Tiger’s Bride’, who alternate between strength and passivity, Carter 
gives the reader repeated images of female assertiveness. Her two 
versions of the character of Little Red Riding Hood, seen as the 
rather anonymous child in ‘The Werewolf’ and the clever virgin in 
‘The Company of Wolves’, are both far less passive than the girl in 
the original tale. The ‘mountaineer’s child’, born and raised in harsh 
conditions, is a tough character who ‘knew the forest too well to 
fear it’ (‘The Werewolf’, p. 127). She is prepared and able to act 
in her own self-defence when threatened. When Carter says ‘the 
child was strong’ (p. 128), she is deliberately inverting the power 
relationship, and the gendered stereotyping, of the adult and the 
child in the original fairy tale. The weak female is replaced by a 
more positive and empowering image of female capability. The 
defiance and ingenuity of the girl in ‘The Company of Wolves’, 
turning the tables on her attacker by burning his clothing in the 
fire, are defined by her laughter. When Carter’s ‘wise child’ (p. 138) 
laughs at the werewolf ‘full in the face’ (p. 138), she is seen to be 
strong enough to cope with any situation. This ‘strong-minded 
child’ (p. 132) enjoys her moment of power. 
The human animal 
This character type is a definitive feature of many of the stories, 
and a crucial element in the whole collection. The tiger, ‘La Bestia’ 
(‘The Tiger’s Bride’, p. 57), is the apotheosis of the male, or of 
female desire realised in male form, for Carter. He is an aristocrat, 
but of a different kind. He is ‘impeccable’ (p. 57), ‘potent’ (p. 58) 
and ‘chaste’ (p. 58), a ‘dreadful’ (p. 60) warning to careless fathers. 
He cries jewelled teardrops when he wrongs the girl with his 
clumsy and embarrassing demands; he is no bullying menace like 
the Marquis or the Count, taking advantage of his power. He has 
a ‘sculptured calm’ (p. 67) in his male disguise, concealing the 
QUESTION 
Would you agree 
that Carter's view 
in The Bloody 
Chamber of the 
possibility of 
positive change 
for women is as 
optimistic as her 
view of men is 
pessimistic? 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
If you wish to find 
out more about the 
lives and work of 
many of the authors 
mentioned in these 
Notes, The Oxford 
Companion to 
English Literature, 
edited by Margaret 
Drabble (revised 
sixth edition, 2006), 
is a good place to 
begin. 
The Bloody Chamber 79 

=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
Characterisation Critical approaches 
The human animal continued 
QUESTION 
Are there any 
other characters 
that could be 
described as 
'human animals', 
in other ways? 
‘annihilating vehemence’ (p. 71) of the animal. Carter’s ‘Beauty’ 
offers herself as sacrifice to this Beast, as in the original story, but 
understands ‘his appetite need not be my extinction’ (p. 74). She 
becomes an animal, after also rejecting her father’s world, in a union 
of sensual pleasure with The Beast. The tiger is a symbol of realised 
mutual passion that affords men and women equal respect, and 
regards sexual desire as beautiful and natural. In becoming most 
true to the animal within the human, men and women can become 
‘fully human’ (‘The Lady of the House of Love’, p. 124). 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Betty Friedan's The 
Feminine Mystique 
(1963), which 
attacked the notion 
that women could 
only find fulfilment 
through being a 
mother and a 
housewife, is often 
said to be the first 
text that inspired 
the second-wave 
feminists. 
Themes 
Marriage 
Marriage is identified in the tales with the past, with corruption and 
with deception. Though the first story in the collection opens with 
the new bride eagerly looking forward to and travelling excitedly 
towards her future life in marriage with the Marquis, ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ portrays marriage as a moral and literal equivalent of 
death. Similarly, in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’, the marriage 
contract is an economic exchange of a commodity where a woman, 
owned and controlled by the father, passes into the ownership of 
another man. This is a historically accurate representation of 
social conventions in marriage which were disguised, but not 
fundamentally changed, by later romantic views of marriage. 
Men no longer own and control women in marriage, because the 
old laws that defined all joint property in marriage as belonging 
to the husband have now changed. But Carter is suggesting that 
men behave as if they still have the right to control women, and 
her stories challenge that expectation of male control. 
The passing of the female from the care of the father to the care of 
the husband, symbolically enacted in the civil and religious rituals 
of the wedding ceremony, is mocked in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’. The 
‘parlour’ (p. 57) where the father gambles away his daughter to 
‘La Bestia’ (p. 57) is a substitute casino that emphasises the role 
that chance plays in human relationships. Yet she, as ‘a woman of 
honour’ (p. 68), is bound by the contract or bargain struck over 
‘A queen, a king, an ace’ (p. 59). Again, Carter is pointing out 
8o The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
Critical approaches Themes 
the economic circumstances or financial arrangements that 
govern the actions of individuals as much as their personalities 
or beliefs. 
In ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ the bankrupted father brings 
‘Miss Lamb’ (p. 48) to lie with ‘Mr Lyon’ (p. 55) after a dispute 
about the limits of hospitality. Her cooperation or compliance with 
the arrangements made between the men guarantees, ‘on some 
magically reciprocal scale, the price of her father’s good fortune’ 
(p. 48). The benefits of economic alliances formed through marriage 
arrangements, similar across many cultures despite taking different 
forms, are demonstrated in her ‘new-found prosperity’ (p. 51). Yet 
she is not committed to a marriage at this point in the story. Beauty 
and her father enjoy ‘life ... as she had never known it’ on ‘credit’, 
so their status, ‘as good as rich’ (p. 51), is a temporary matter and 
subject to terms and conditions. Her absence from the Beast’s home 
causes his domestic affairs to fall into a state of advanced neglect and 
‘disillusion’ (p. 53). Flower arranging is an activity stereotypically 
associated with the bourgeois housewife, generally taken for 
granted by their husbands. The dying flowers symbolise not 
only the Beast’s romantic enervation but also hint at the future 
Miss Lamb will have as Mrs Lyon: domestic servant. 
‘Wolf-Alice’ and ‘The Company of Wolves’ portray different 
versions of partnership between the sexes which have little to 
do with any recognisable ceremony or convention of marriage. 
Although Wolf-Alice is dressed as a ‘white bride’, her ‘pitiful’ 
(p. 148) ‘ministrations’ (p. 149) to the wounds of the Duke at the 
transformative end of the story are not conducted through any 
aspect of civilised behaviour. Marriage is a major aspect of human 
civilisation, but Wolf-Alice exists outside all such norms. That is 
why she can lead the Duke into a realisation of his identity beyond 
the traditional values of patriarchy. Carter is suggesting that any 
new realignment of male and female relationships can only be 
‘brought into being by her’ (p. 149), even though ‘she lives without 
a future’ (p. 141). This implies a recognition that the idealisation 
of marriage as a binding contract, or life sentence, is difficult to 
sustain. 
‘The Company of Wolves’ shows through its table-turning 
conclusion that women can have relationships with men on their 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
The Djinn in the 
Nightingale's Eye 
(1994) is a collection 
of original fairy 
tales by A. S. Byatt 
(b.1936); it includes 
two stories that 
appeared earlier in 
her novel Possession 
(1990), which won 
the Booker Prize. 
QUESTION 
To what extent 
do these tales 
challenge your 
view of male 
and female 
relationships? 
The Bloody Chamber 8i 

=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
Themes Critical approaches 
Marriage continued 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Shakespeare's 
Lady Macbeth, 
memorably 
portrayed by Judi 
Dench in the RSC 
production of 
Macbeth broadcast 
on ITV in 1979, is a 
model of powerful 
and ambitious evil 
in feminine form. In 
a chilling speech she 
invokes the spirits 
of evil to 'unsex' her 
- to defeminise her 
and fill her 'from 
the crown to the 
toe top-full / Of 
direst cruelty. ... 
/That no 
compunctious 
visitings of nature / 
Shake my fell 
purpose' (Act I 
Scene 5). Carter's 
women are 
attracted to 
'corruption' 
('The Bloody 
Chamber', 
p. 6) but do not 
surrender to the 
forces of evil 
represented in these 
highly moral tales. 
own terms by taking charge of their own destiny. Carter’s ‘savage 
marriage ceremony’ (p. 139) is a prelude to a montage of images that 
conveys the idea of future peace and prosperity, the ‘happily ever 
after’ promised in every fairy tale yet rarely glimpsed in reality. 
The ‘blizzard died down’ after the violence of the tale to leave 
the forest ‘All silent, all still’ on ‘Christmas Day’ (p. 139), Carter’s 
words echoing the refrain of the well-known Christian carol ‘Silent 
Night’, concluding her tale with a hopeful and powerful metaphor 
of reconciliation. 
Sexuality 
The tales as a whole offer an impression of sexuality as an equally 
frightening and exciting aspect of adult behaviour; Carter does not 
shrink from portraying the extremes of desire in detailing human 
behaviour at its most perverse. In ‘The Bloody Chamber’ the risks 
involved in allowing another person to define one’s sexuality, in 
being submissive and passive in a relationship, are given an urgent 
imperative nature. Carter does flirt with sadomasochistic 
psychology here, but ultimately rejects masochistic submission 
as empty and unfulfilling. 
In ‘The Bloody Chamber’ Carter emphasises the appeal of the risk 
in marrying an older, more experienced man. The attention and 
prestige the pianist acquires through her association with a powerful 
man are flattering to her. She, who knows ‘nothing of the world’ 
(p. 4), finds herself caught in conflicting emotional responses that 
give rise to ‘a kind of fear’ at the ‘strange, impersonal arousal’ and 
‘repugnance’ (p. 11) she feels when her husband delays the moment 
of consummation of their marriage. But it is more a fear of her 
sexual response that is being described. The anticipation of the event 
is far more pleasurable than the event itself, the Marquis suggests, 
and that is certainly true for her. 
The pianist’s disturbing realisation that she, like the Marquis, is 
capable of almost anything is a moment of self-awareness: ‘I sensed 
in myself a potentiality for corruption that took my breath away’ 
(p. 6). But it is also a realisation of how very far from corrupt 
she is, having led an ‘innocent and confined life’ (p. 6). As she is 
stripped in the ‘formal disrobing of the bride’ (p. 11), her responses 
are ambiguous. The ‘trembling’ (p. 10), blushing and changed 
82 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
1 
Critical approaches Themes 
breathing pattern could be understood equally to be nervousness 
or sexual arousal, until she confesses: ‘I was aghast to feel myself 
stirring’ (p. 11). But the complexity of this physical sensation is 
based on the fact that she has ‘seen [her] flesh in his eyes’ (p. 11); 
her desire is aroused by his voyeurism, suggesting exhibitionism 
on her part. The Marquis’s pleasures are visual; he enjoys looking at 
her. Her surprise is that she seems to enjoy being looked at by him 
in this way. This was a controversial sentiment for a feminist writer 
to give to a female character in the 1970s, particularly as it comes 
close to confirming a male chauvinist attitude around at the time 
that women enjoyed being dominated and humiliated. 
The narrator is entirely passive at this stage and does not anticipate 
anything but being a recipient of male attention: ‘my husband beds 
me’ (p. 12). After losing her virginity, she recalls the moment with 
hints of the violence involved. The Marquis seems so exhausted, he 
might have been ‘fighting’ with her; his composure was shattered 
‘like a porcelain vase flung against a wall’; she heard him ‘shriek 
and blaspheme’ (p. 14); and there was blood. Carter has assembled 
in the new wife’s recount of the moment of ‘the orgasm’ a careful 
construct of images of domestic violence. Her ‘spent body’ (p. 14) 
has been used up; her virginity consumed by the Marquis as 
‘connoisseur’ (p. 13) and ‘gourmand’ (p. 11). Her unfulfilled desire, 
which seems to survive the onslaught of the Marquis’s attentions, 
is thwarted by his decision to abandon her on the honeymoon for 
business. Her frustration is expressed when she has ‘to be content’ 
(p. 15) with only having dinner with him. 
Human sexuality is clearly conceived by Carter as something 
that is dangerous and animalistic - as demonstrated by the 
violent images in ‘The Bloody Chamber’; the voyeurism and 
exhibitionism in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’; the comical contrast of the 
mundane rutting cats and the exuberant coupling of the lovers 
in ‘Puss-in-Boots’; the imprisonment of the women in ‘The 
Erl-King’; the intimate moments of transformation in ‘The Tiger’s 
Bride’, ‘The Company of Wolves’ and ‘Wolf-Alice’ - but desire 
always remains contained within the boundaries of heterosexual 
behaviour. The various endings of the tales offer different insights 
into the possibilities of resolving the contradictions Carter 
perceives in male and female relationships. 
CONTEXT 
Erica Jong's novel 
Fear of Flying 
(1973), published 
six years before The 
Bloody Chamber, 
was controversial in 
its frank discussion 
of female sexuality. 
V___ 
The Bloody Chamber 83 

=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
Themes Critical approaches 
Sexuality continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
I Know Why the 
Caged Bird Sings 
(1969) by Maya 
Angelou (b.1928) 
recounts her 
experiences of 
childhood rape, 
racism and sexism. 
The title comes 
from the poem 
'Sympathy' by Paul 
Laurence Dunbar 
(1872-1906): 
'I know why the 
caged bird sings, 
ah me, / When his 
wing is bruised and 
his bosom sore, / 
When he beats 
his bars and would 
be free' (15-17). 
Angelou's own 
poem of the same 
title concludes: 'the 
caged bird / sings of 
freedom'. 
QUESTION 
When Carter 
explores the 
dynamics of persona! 
terror in 'The Bloody 
Chamber', do you 
think her writing 
is literary 
entertainment or 
feminist 
propaganda? 
The view on sexuality within the stories is exclusively a female view, 
presented as a challenge to the prevailing attitudes of the 1970s. 
Male sexuality is represented mostly as aggressive and selfish. The 
men in the stories are not presented with any life-threatening rite of 
passage or dilemma in pursuing their sexual destinies. The Marquis 
is a serial killer who has followed in the footsteps of his ancestors to 
enter ‘the kingdom of the unimaginable’ (‘The Bloody Chamber’, 
p. 36). Mr Lyon, lying down with Miss Lamb at the end of ‘The 
Courtship of Mr Lyon’, can depend on her self-sacrifice to sustain 
his existence. The advances of The Beast in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ are 
only rejected, at first, because they are so timid. Puss-in-Boots is 
an insensitive braggart: ‘what lady in all the world could say “no” 
to ... a fine marmalade cat?’ (‘Puss-in-Boots’, p. 76). His master has 
practical problems to overcome to gain access to the lady who is the 
object of his desire, but these matters are resolved for him by the 
female tabby cat. The soldier in ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ 
will not take ‘criminal advantage’ (p. 122) of the vampire he believes 
to be in need of medical treatment for ‘nervous hysteria’ (p. 124). 
The certainty of all these men, their self-assurance, is their most 
deadly attribute. 
The roots of Carter’s portrayal of women’s fears of sex lie in an 
awareness of the long history for women of sexual activity being a 
calculated risk with possibly fatal consequences. The real, physical 
consequences of desire for women are unavoidably linked with pain. 
Sexuality is seen as a kind of portal through which a woman passes 
towards possible fulfilment, perhaps motherhood, or even death. 
The sensation of fear, particularly of fear that is proved or known to 
be unfounded or unreal, is stimulating. It is this thrill that underpins 
the psychology of the reading experience in the Gothic and horror 
genres; humans find fear a pleasurable sensation, up to a point. 
The bride does not mention any personal fear of the Marquis 
until she is approaching the forbidden chamber itself, and only 
acknowledges a ‘dreadful anguish’ (p. 28) when she realises she is to 
join this macabre display of dead wives. When she mistakes the sound 
of Jean-Yves for her husband returning she finds that ‘fear gave me 
strength’ (p. 30). Yet the return of her husband does cause genuine 
fear and she only has sufficient resourcefulness to delay the moment 
of execution long enough for her mother to secure her rescue. 
84 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
Critical approaches Themes 
This thrill of risk-taking accompanies all the experiences of the 
young women in these tales as they find themselves confronted by 
strange men who exert power over them of one kind or another. 
Even ‘Beauty’ in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’, beneath her moral indignation, 
is a little disappointed to discover the Beast has not asked for more 
than a quick look at her naked: ‘That he should want so little was 
the reason why I could not give it’ (p. 68). 
Metamorphosis 
Changing the forms of things to reveal some idea of truth is a 
common theme of folk and fairy tales. In the original ‘Beauty and 
the Beast’ the creature is rescued from brutality by the goodness of 
a true woman, who restores him to virtue and his handsome self. 
Carter’s two takes on this offer something quite different. Mr Lyon 
loses his attractive and powerful animal qualities and ends up 
looking ‘unkempt’ (‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’, p. 54), having 
acquired ‘a broken nose, such as the noses of retired boxers’ 
(pp. 54-5). The impression that he is, in fact, not such a handsome 
beast after all is hard to avoid. ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ dispenses with 
such tongue-in-cheek tactics and passes the transformation to 
‘Beauty’, who - having dispatched her replica to the real world of 
her avaricious father - is free to shed ‘all the skins of a life in the 
world’ (p. 75) and become a beast herself. Carter inverts the 
symbolic form as she inverts the tale. To be beast-like is to be 
virtuous; to become ‘manly’ is to be vicious. 
‘The Snow Child’ offers a different view on what is real in desire 
and how what is desired cannot always be realised. The brevity 
of this tale does not exaggerate the changes that take place here 
in swift succession, but it is worth considering how the Count’s 
wishes become manifest in the world, and how the Countess’s 
wishes change her situation. The transitory nature of male desire 
is emphasised by the vanishing and melting away of the child: 
‘Soon there was nothing left of her but a feather ... a bloodstain ... 
and the rose’ (p. 106). 
‘The Lady of the House of Love’, with its beautiful Romanian 
aristocratic vampire being transformed into a ‘far older, less 
beautiful’ woman (p. 124), turns ‘Sleeping Beauty’ upside down. 
In the original tale, the princess pricks her finger on a poisoned 
CONTEXT 
Ovid's 
Metamorphoses 
was written 
approximately two 
thousand years 
ago. A poem 
written over 
fifteen books, 
it tells of the 
creation and 
history of the 
world and contains 
tales of 
transformation in 
which a mortal or a 
god is changed 
into a plant or 
animal. Tales of 
transfor-mation 
are common in 
ancient myths, 
v_I_/ 
CONTEXT 
Emily Gerard's 
The Land Beyond 
the Forest: Facts, 
Figures, and Fancies 
from Transylvania 
(1888), an account 
of Transylvanian 
folklore, and Bram 
Stoker's novel 
Dracula (1897) are 
the core of the 
Dracula legend that 
fuels tourism in 
Romania. 
v___s 
The Bloody Chamber 85 

=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
Themes Critical approaches 
Metamorphosis continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In his introduction 
to Supernatural 
Horror in Literature 
(published in 1973), 
Howard Phillips 
Lovecraft writes: 
'The oldest and 
strongest emotion 
of mankind is fear, 
and the oldest and 
strongest kind of 
fear is fear of 
the unknown. 
These facts few 
psychologists will 
dispute, and their 
admitted truth must 
establish for all time 
the genuineness 
and dignity of the 
weirdly horrible 
tales as a literary 
form.' 
object and is about to die. Saved by the limited magical powers 
of good fairies, the princess does not die but lies sleeping until 
magically restored by the kiss of a handsome prince who has 
fought his way through the undergrowth to rescue her. The moral 
conveyed celebrates the virtue of patience, and suggests that the 
endurance of suffering worthy of reward. The vampire cannot sleep 
(here a euphemism for death) and is only able to find some peace 
after cutting her finger, an event shifted to a different point in the 
story. The handsome prince does not kiss her, not in any romantic 
or sexual sense, and is too dim to understand the changes going on 
around him. Carter makes the Countess become ‘less beautiful’ 
(p. 124) after her lover tries to ‘kiss it better’ (p. 123), inverting the 
original tale where Sleeping Beauty is restored to health. Although 
the Countess and her soldier are separated, unlike Prince Charming 
and Sleeping Beauty, it becomes clear the Countess will find some 
kind of union with her lover, and many others, in death. 
The transformations of the wolf, that potent symbol of the 
ferocity of nature, the dangers of the unknown and all-consuming 
desire, are played out over the different versions of the ‘Little Red 
Riding Hood’ tale, though it is a feature of ‘The Company 
of Wolves’ that the metamorphosis is thwarted by the ‘wise 
child’ (p. 138). The threat of the werewolf is tamed by his 
total transformation into a wolf. With his dangerous nature 
domesticated, unable to return to the form of a man, he is now 
merely a ‘tender wolf’ (p. 139). Carter here draws on another 
strand of folk tale which gives women credit for having the wit 
to outsmart the devil himself. 
Beauty and wealth 
A recurring theme in the stories is that beauty can but should not 
be purchased or owned by those who control vast wealth. In ‘The 
Bloody Chamber’ the bride is bought with jewels and clothes; 
elsewhere Beauty is bought through unscrupulous dealing, both 
financial and at the card table: in each case wealth corrupts beauty. 
The ‘tell-tale stain’ on the pianist’s forehead takes ‘the shape and 
brilliance of the heart on a playing card’ (‘The Bloody Chamber’, 
p. 36). Beauty in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ becomes vain; ‘she 
smiled at herself in mirrors a little too often’ (p. 52). ‘Beauty’ in 
86 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 89 ===
Critical approaches Themes 
The Tiger’s Bride’ learns to accept that some truth is contained in 
her father’s cynical axiom ‘that, if you have enough money, 
anything is possible’ (p. 69). In her clockwork servant’s mirror she 
can only see her father’s face reflected as if she ‘had put on his face’ 
(p. 66). It is evident in their appearance and their emotional state 
that being groomed for their master’s pleasure damages them. 
Unlike standard fairy-tale happy endings where the lovers become 
rich, marry and live happily ever after, Carter’s characters show the 
escape from the material world as freedom from corruption. The 
pianist’s redistribution of her dead husband’s wealth is a limited act 
of restorative class justice, with Carter’s revision of the fairy-tale 
formula ‘she became rich and lived happily ever after’ ending in a 
fashion that reflects her socialist principles. 
The Beast in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ wears a mask of a painted ‘beautiful 
face’ but it is ‘too perfect’ to be ‘entirely human’ (p. 58). Carter is 
playing with the reader’s expectations and understanding of the 
character at this point in the story, deliberately keeping the real 
identity of The Beast hidden, but subtle suggestions are made that 
wealth, which enables and requires the adoption of the disguise, 
distances humans from each other and from themselves. Carter is 
influenced here by the Marxist analysis of capitalism and its effects 
on people. Karl Marx (1818-83) described how people become 
obsessed with the things they make, buy, sell and use; unable to 
see themselves in any meaningful way as part of the world. Marx 
described this effect as alienation, where people become strangers 
to themselves. This is clearly represented in the Marquis and 
his private collections of art and literature; and his conspicuous 
consumption of the finest things in life without the necessity of 
working for a living. His personal degradation symbolises the 
degenerate nature of the idle rich and inherited wealth. Wealth is 
not, in itself, corrupting or consoling; it is the product of collective 
human endeavour. In private hands, hoarded for individual 
satisfaction, wealth becomes a destructive power. Carter clearly 
wants us to realise the opposite: that great wealth shared has the 
power to do more good than harm. But part of the problem for 
Carter is that, in presenting the world of luxury with such sensuous 
delight in language - in her rich depiction of grandiose buildings, 
lustrous furnishings, fine clothing and rare works of art - the 
CONTEXT 
Marx and Engels 
explored the 
concept of 
alienation in their 
early works such 
as The German 
Ideology (written 
in 1845-6, but not 
published in full 
until 1932) and 
Economic and 
Philosophical 
Manuscripts of 
1844: 'it is clear 
that the more the 
worker spends 
himself, the more 
powerful becomes 
the alien world of 
objects which he 
creates over and 
against himself, 
the poorer he 
himself - his inner 
world - becomes, 
the less belongs to 
him as his own' 
(The Germany 
Ideology, 1997 
edition, p. 63). 
Marx returned to 
the idea in greater 
depth in Das 
Kapital (Capital) 
Volume 1, Part 1, 
Section 4: 'The 
Fetishism of 
Commodities 
and The Secret 
Thereof' (1886). 
The Bloody Chamber 87 

=== PDF PAGE 90 ===
Themes Critical approaches 
Beauty and wealth continued 
CONTEXT 
Representations 
of the spirit of 
the wood or the 
spirit of spring 
are associated 
with paganism. 
Ornamental 
depictions of the 
Green Man as a 
symbol of seasonal 
fertility are often 
found in the 
stonework and 
wood carvings 
of old European 
churches. His head 
is usually wreathed 
in foliage, with 
leaves and 
branches sprouting 
from his ears, nose 
and mouth. In 
Christian terms 
the Green Man is 
viewed as a symbol 
of Easter. 
\_/ 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
A photograph of a 
Green Man carving 
in Rosslyn Chapel 
can be seen, along 
with a description 
of the Green Man 
in British folklore, 
in Marc Alexander's 
Companion to the 
Folklore, Myths and 
Customs of Britain 
(2002). 
question of ownership and access to great wealth is displaced by 
the display of luxury itself (for more on this see Language and 
style). 
Man, woman and nature 
It is easy to forget that the generic use of the masculine noun ‘man’ 
to indicate humanity as a whole, as an abbreviation of ‘mankind’, 
was a common cliche being challenged at the time Carter was 
writing The Bloody Chamber. Carter makes use of ‘types’ 
(see Characterisation) but does not allow one gender ‘type’ to 
misrepresent humanity. Man and nature are depicted as separate 
entities in these tales, while woman is potentially a creature of 
nature. For Carter, womankind is imbued with the power to heal 
the rift between man and nature. 
‘The Erl-King’ shows the spirit of nature as a man, but as a 
peculiarly isolated and feminised man: ‘He is an excellent 
housewife’ (p. 99). In the middle of the wild forest, the Erl-King 
tends to domestic chores, looking after all living and growing things 
in his garden ‘where all the flowers were birds and beasts’ (p. 98). 
Carter describes him as a primitive hunter-gatherer type, with much 
emphasis on his gathering of ‘unnatural treasures’ (p. 99). What 
Carter means by this is not immediately clear, as the next moment 
she narrates a long passage devoted to entirely natural things 
collected by the Erl-King: pigeons’ eggs, dandelions, goat’s milk, 
goat’s cheese and rabbit stew. It is only at the end of that paragraph 
that Carter describes the Erl-King’s ‘cruel’ habit of keeping ‘singing 
birds’ (p. 99) in cages. It is his ‘green eye’ (p. 103) that reduces 
women to the size of birds, and his ‘regard’ (p. 104) that innocently 
imprisons them. Carter’s intertextual references to Shakespeare’s 
play Othello (c. 1602-4), specifically Iago’s ironic warning to 
Othello that jealousy is ‘the green-eyed monster which doth mock / 
The meat it feeds on’ (Act III Scene 3), combine with the notions of 
his ‘regard’ and being ‘looked after’ (p. 103) by him. Carter seems to 
be suggesting that men are ‘naturally’ possessive and jealous, and see 
the world in ways that women do not. She also suggests that women 
are not obliged to be limited by this supposed ‘human nature’ 
of man. 
88 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 91 ===
Critical approaches Themes 
The concept that man hides his true nature behind a mask is 
also presented in ‘The Bloody Chamber’ and ‘The Tiger’s Bride’, 
where the Marquis and The Beast emerge most dangerously when 
the mask is removed. Elsewhere the power of nature is disfigured 
or disguised in man, for example the Beast in ‘The Courtship of 
Mr Lyon’ or the werewolf in the last three stories. It is the figure 
of the werewolf which most clearly presents the relationship 
between man and nature as a perverse and evil trick played upon 
woman: ‘Carnivore incarnate, only immaculate flesh appeases him’ 
(‘The Company of Wolves’, p. 138) is a statement that applies to 
the Marquis in ‘The Bloody Chamber’ as much as it does to the 
wolf in ‘The Company of Wolves’. In repeatedly returning to the 
transformation of this triangular relationship between man, woman 
and nature, Carter challenges the notion that there is such a thing as 
an unchanging human nature or a ‘natural order’ in human society. 
The eponymous character in ‘Wolf-Alice’ clearly expresses the 
problems of over-identification with the inner animal, as it is 
obvious that human society demands a more fastidious attention to 
personal hygiene than nature. Part of being human is being able to 
communicate in sophisticated language, visual and verbal. Language 
is a social phenomenon. Children raised in a wild state of nature do 
not know how to crack the codes of human society. Wolf-Alice 
cannot anticipate or imagine any other moment of time than ‘the 
present tense’ (p. 141). For her there is no past and future, only a 
‘continuous’ (p. 141) moment of the now. While there is ‘sensual 
immediacy’ (p. 141) to her feral existence, there is no future. The 
point here is that we humans can adapt our environment to our 
needs, and have been better and more successful at doing this 
than animals, because of our capacity to imagine alternatives, to 
remember and share the sequences of alternative moments as we 
create the narratives of our lives. Carter is pointing out in her 
stories that our success in adapting the natural environment has 
created a social environment that does not allow all our human 
needs to be adequately fulfilled; and that this is particularly true 
for women because the social environment that has evolved is, she 
would argue, so often a patriarchal one. 
With few exceptions, nature in the stories is a cold and 
unwelcoming place that exists at the point at which human 
civilisation stops. Nature in Carter’s stories can be interpreted 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Kate Millett's Sexual 
Politics (1970) was a 
controversial attack 
on patriarchal 
values that 
advanced the 
feminist agenda 
in American and 
Europe. Later 
feminists such as 
Camille Paglia have 
criticised Millett, 
causing much 
controversy among 
academic feminists. 
The Bloody Chamber 89 

=== PDF PAGE 92 ===
Themes Critical approaches 
Man, WOMAN AND NATURE continued 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
The poet Anne 
Sexton (1928-74) 
retells seventeen 
Brothers Grimm 
tales in her verse 
collection 
Transforma tions 
(1971). In so doing 
Sexton questions 
many of the 
conventional 
ideas related to 
femininity found in 
the tales. 
as the physical world itself, as the physical world used as a symbol 
or sign, and also as the inner or instinctive nature that breaks the 
social codes of civilised behaviour. 
The climate is as much a feature of the natural world as the 
landscape in these stories, and most are set in the coldest parts of the 
world in the coldest season. ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ unfolds in 
a hazardous ‘winter’s landscape’ (p. 43) that is slow to leave Mr 
Lyon’s home, though with the image of ‘a drift of fallen petals’ 
(p. 55) spring asserts itself at the conclusion as a more hopeful 
ending. The aristocrats fleeing the Russian winter in ‘The Tiger’s 
Bride’ find no comfort in the ‘treacherous South’ (p. 58) where 
parlours can be ‘cold as hell’ (p. 59). ‘The Erl-King’ takes place in 
an autumnal world with ‘Introspective weather’ (p. 96). ‘The Snow 
Child’ is set in midwinter, as are ‘The Company of Wolves’ and 
‘The Werewolf’. The depressive effect of the cold weather in each 
story in succession is mitigated by settings for other stories which 
are a contrast to that dominant mood. ‘Puss-in-Boots’ reveals itself 
to be anticipating the arrival of the first ‘vernal hint of spring’ (p. 94) 
as the cats and lovers mate so enthusiastically. ‘The Lady of the 
House of Love’ has its main action taking place in ‘hot, ripe 
summer’ (p. Ill) and the events of ‘Wolf-Alice’ span a longer 
period that is not tied to one season. 
The way human behaviour is shaped by a harsh and bleak 
environment is a theme Carter uses frequently. It forms part of the 
introductory preamble to the main story in both ‘The Werewolf’ 
and ‘The Company of Wolves’. The equation of ‘cold weather’ 
and ‘cold hearts’ (p. 126) in the ‘The Werewolf’ is more concretely 
related to a very practical fear of hungry wolves, ‘grey as famine’ 
(‘The Company of Wolves’, p. 130), made more dangerous in 
wintertime when food is scarce. 
The distance from civilisation, or how far society is from being 
truly civilised, is symbolised by the emptiness of the landscape that 
surrounds the fortresses of the patriarchs. The ‘amphibious’ (p. 9) 
isolation of the Marquis’s castle in ‘The Bloody Chamber’ is echoed 
in the ‘bereft landscape’ (p. 70) that is the setting for The Beast’s 
palace in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’, ‘a burned-out planet’ (p. 63) 
dominated by the ‘sad browns and sepias of winter’ (p. 70). 
90 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 93 ===
Critical approaches Themes 
The sea in ‘The Bloody Chamber’ is linked to the matriarch and 
by extension to ideas of the earth mother or ‘Mother Earth’. The 
narrator describes the ‘amniotic salinity of the ocean’ (p. 8) as the 
first sensation recorded on arrival at her destination. This compares 
the sea to the amniotic fluid that surrounds a baby in the womb 
during pregnancy, the most intimate protective layer for the 
developing child. The watery connection between mother and child 
is followed through the ‘melting’ landscape (p. 8), and formed in the 
tears that flow over ‘gold bath taps’ (p. 21) while they talk on the 
telephone. The pianist’s ‘avenging angel’ (p. 39) emerges from the 
sea as the personification of the protective maternal instinct, 
reshaping the pattern of the earlier connections between mother, 
sea and child. 
The forest is a paradoxical symbol in the stories that feature that 
setting or employ a variation on that image of a world that is not 
within human control. The rose bushes proliferating in ‘The Lady 
of the House of Love’ represent the idea of the fairy-tale forest 
just as much as the setting of ‘The Werewolf’, ‘The Company 
of Wolves’ or ‘The Snow Child’. The fairy-tale forest is physically 
unwelcoming and alluring at the same time. This is most obvious in 
‘The Erl-King’, where the narrator enjoys the ‘delicious loneliness’ 
(p. 97) at the same time as she is aware of the fact that ‘there is no 
clue to guide you through in perfect safety’ (p. 96). 
There is something almost pagan about Carter’s reiteration of 
themes and images of the forest as a place of discovery, sacrifice 
and redemption. Her complex imagery - where trees of the forest 
become the strands of a ‘cat’s cradle’ (p. 97), intricately weaving nets 
or traps, or the grass and the undergrowth grow over the track 
leaving a ‘subtle labyrinth’ (p. 96) that makes it almost impossible to 
follow such good advice as ‘do not leave the path’ (‘The Werewolf’, 
p. 127) - seems to be advancing an agenda for a simpler life, less 
cluttered with the imperatives of acquisition and exchange, and 
more honest self-knowledge for men and women about their place 
in nature. 
CONTEXT 
Paganism is best 
understood as a 
diverse group of 
religious faiths 
that share a 
perspective on 
respect for the 
natural world. 
Modern-day 
pagans might 
identify themselves 
as Wiccans, Druids, 
shamans, sacred 
ecologists, Odinists 
or heathens, 
with some 
concentrating on 
specific traditions, 
practices or 
elements such 
as ecology, 
witchcraft, Celtic 
traditions or 
certain gods. Many 
of these faiths 
draw inspiration 
from polytheistic 
belief systems 
of indigenous 
peoples around 
the world. 
v_/ 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Simon Schama's 
Language and 
Memory (1995) 
contains a chapter 
on forests in the 
Western 
imagination. 
The Bloody Chamber 91 

=== PDF PAGE 94 ===
Structure Critical approaches 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In her essay 'Notes 
from the Front 
Line' Carter writes: 
'I believe that all 
myths are products 
of the human mind 
and reflect only 
aspects of materia! 
human practice. 
I'm in the 
demythologising 
business' (in On 
Gender and 
Writing, edited by 
Michelene Wandor, 
1983, p. 71). 
QUESTION 
Is it difficult to 
share Helen 
Simpson's view of 
the collection as a 
whole as 'a new 
literary hybrid' 
that 'will change 
the world' (in her 
introduction to 
the 2006 Vintage 
edition of The 
Bloody Chamber, 
p. xix)? 
Structure 
As a collection of stories, the structure of The Bloody Chamber 
is not entirely cohesive. There is no obvious thread or theme that 
flows from story to story in a defined manner, except, perhaps, that 
they are all inspired by and derived from fairy tales. ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’, ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ and ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ 
form a trio of tales about women marrying monstrous men. 
‘Puss-in-Boots’ provides an entertaining comic interlude whose 
exuberant and anarchic spirit gives way to the slower pace of the 
dark and disorienting exploration of the fairy-tale forest in ‘The 
Erl-King’. ‘The Snow Child’ snaps along briskly, its simple 
structure following the fairy-tale formula that events happen in 
reciprocally related patterns of three. ‘The Lady of the House of 
Love’ is an elaborate Gothic romance. The last three stories, ‘The 
Werewolf’, ‘The Company of Wolves’ and ‘Wolf-Alice’, are 
concerned with how to deal with the big, bad wolf. All the stories, 
even ‘Puss-in-Boots’, deal with death and with monsters of the 
imagination. But the ‘bloody chamber’ (p. 35) of the opening story 
provides the title that unites the collection. Considering them as 
tales from ‘the kingdom of the unimaginable’ (‘The Bloody 
Chamber’, p. 36) or as stories of ‘the fated sisterhood’ (p. 27), 
Carter has set up a display of horrors to arouse the emotions and 
celebrate curiosity. 
Narrative techniques 
Carter employs a different narrative style for each story and very 
often within each particular tale moves from one narrative style to 
another. The most complex and subtle experiments with narrative 
form come in ‘The Erl-King’, and the European tradition that is its 
source is likely to be the least familiar of all the stories that form the 
partial foundations of the collection. 
Carter uses first person narrative forms in ‘The Bloody Chamber’, 
‘The Tiger’s Bride’, ‘Puss-in-Boots’ and ‘The Erl-King’. Only in 
the last is the identity of the narrator at first concealed, and the 
position of the narrator to the story is unclear, shifting in and out of 
92 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 95 ===
Critical approaches Narrative techniques 
the action in a dreamlike manner which is intrusive and unsettling. 
Although clearly a female (a girl), the narrator never becomes a 
defined character as the other invented and identifiable - but 
unnamed - narrators do. Puss-in-Boots has an enormous persona 
but is known by a descriptive label which is not really a name and 
lacks individuality, even for a cat. 
‘The Erl-King’ begins its narrative in the third person in the past 
tense; moves to direct address in the second person, present tense; 
and shifts to the third person, future tense, over the first three 
paragraphs. Then it modulates through a couple of changes into 
a first person past tense; this uncertainty of tense and person in 
the narrative voice continues throughout the story. The effect is 
dislocating and disorienting. Time and space are not fixed or definite 
entities. The story proceeds through these uncertainly connected 
moments because Carter retains enough passing detail in the terrain 
described to form a recognisable chronological recount and suggest 
the possibility that a narrative path will emerge. The habit of 
reading, the processing of words that follow words on the page in 
some sort of order, creates an expectation of narrative: something is 
bound to happen. The forest is as much a passing of time as it is a 
place, and the autumn is felt rather than observed as ‘the approach 
of winter’: ‘cold ... grips hold of your belly and squeezes it tight’ 
(p. 96). Carter suggests a place that is not yet dead but is dying: 
‘All will fall still, all lapse’ (p. 97). The vague sense of narrative 
confusion is deliberately and carefully controlled by Carter and it 
creates an eerie sensation of being lost in her forest. The reader 
relies on the narrator to guide us back to the path, but has the 
uneasy suspicion that Carter is not in a hurry to find the quickest 
way home. 
‘Wolf-Alice’ has some touches that suggest the narrator is possibly 
implicated in the action of the story, but these function as a device 
to implicate the reader in the rejection of the wild child more than 
they identify the narrator as other than Angela Carter. The 
opening sentence invites a sense of collusion by the use of the first 
person plural pronoun to draw attention to the child as an alien 
being who does not speak ‘like we do’ (p. 140). Later in the story, 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
Johann Wolfgang 
von Goethe 
(1749-1832) wrote 
a poem called 
'Der Erlkonig' 
(The Erlking', 
1782) in which a 
supernatural being 
tries to entice a 
young boy to go 
with him: 'my father 
... dost thou not 
hear / The words 
that the Erl-King 
now breathes in 
mine ear?' (13-14). 
Unsuccessful, the 
Erl-King kills him 
while he is held in 
his father's arms: 
'my father, he seizes 
me fast, / Full sorely 
the Erl-King has 
hurt me at last' 
(27-8). This poem 
was later set to 
music by Franz 
Schubert 
(1797-1828). 
The Bloody Chamber 93 

=== PDF PAGE 96 ===
Narrative techniques Critical approaches 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In his essay 
'The Storyteller' 
German philosopher 
Walter Benjamin 
(1892-1940) points 
outs that the early 
folk tale would 
have contained 
something useful 
for the listener, 
perhaps a moral 
or some practical 
advice. This essay 
can be found in 
Benjamin's 
collection 
Illuminations (the 
1999 translation by 
Harry Zohn is a 
good edition, with 
an introduction by 
Hannah Arendt). 
QUESTION 
If it is true that the 
second wave of 
feminism has 
passed, is Carter's 
The Bloody 
Chamber little 
more than a 
historical 
document of that 
social period? 
the narrator admits: ‘we secluded her in animal privacy out of fear 
of her imperfection because it showed us what we might have 
been’ (p. 144). 
The narrative voice in the other tales is the third person omniscient 
narrator. It is safe to assume that this is the voice of Carter herself. 
She is not a participant in the events of the stories except in so far as 
she is ordering and creating them. However, she frequently makes 
an aside to the reader in the knowing way that raconteurs will often 
do to change the pace of an anecdote. Occasionally characters will 
speak through the narrator without their speech being formally 
identified as dialogue with conventional punctuation. This often 
happens with the language refrains of fairy tales, such as ‘What big 
eyes you have’ (p. 137) in ‘The Company of Wolves’, and other 
recognisable elements of familiar fairy-tale codes and responses. 
This is a device which implies the words are the inner thoughts of 
the character being made available to us by the narrator in character, 
something that happens naturally when stories are verbally 
exchanged and read aloud. They are allusions that assume a shared 
understanding of the storytelling conventions that signal narrative 
events in fairy tales. For example, in ‘The Lady of the House of 
Love’, the narrative links between an image of the Countess being 
cleaned up after devouring her prey and the introduction of the 
hero through the refrain from ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’: ‘Fee fie fo 
fum / I smell the blood of an Englishman’ (p. 111). The quatrain is 
completed to bring him into the story fully with his arrival at the 
village, under threat of being devoured: ‘Be he alive or be he dead / 
I’ll grind his bones to make my bread’ (p. 112). 
In relation to the idea of metamorphosis as a significant feature 
of the collection of tales as a whole, it is worth considering how 
the narrative changes its form throughout Carter’s tales. Carter 
employs metamorphosis for different effects within the stories, 
changing the forms of the tales as she does so. This metamorphosis 
of narrative form has been the focus of recent critical interest in 
Carter. This is perhaps because forms of sexual identity have 
become less rigid and prescriptive in society, or because the 
feminist critique seems less relevant to the modern world. 
94 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 97 ===
Critical approaches Language and style 
Language and style 
Helen Simpson in her introduction to the 2006 Vintage edition of 
The Bloody Chamber defines Carter as ‘an abstract thinker with an 
intensely visual imagination’ (p. x). This is the chief characteristic of 
Carter’s language use in all the stories in the collection, despite their 
stylistic differences. Whether she is exploring the pseudo-female 
narration of de Sade in ‘The Bloody Chamber’, parodying male 
pomposity in ‘Puss-in-Boots’, or Gothic melodrama in ‘The Lady 
of the House of Love’, Carter seeks to entertain. Her use of 
symbolic objects as ‘a system of signification’ (quoted in Simpson’s 
2006 introduction, p. xv) is conscious for Carter but optional for 
the reader. 
Carter’s visual imagination is complemented by other compelling 
features of her language use. Her vocabulary, ranging from the 
complex and detailed language of classic literature to monosyllabic 
words of sexual reference that still retain their shock value in print, 
is richly diverse and often startling. In her stories, words such as 
‘prothalamion’ (‘The Company of Wolves’, p. 138) and ‘chthonic’ 
(‘The Bloody Chamber’, p. 35) evoke the mythology of earlier 
civilisations and display Carter’s acquaintance with literature of 
academic interest. 
Carter’s portrayal of location and setting, through densely textured 
description of detail and careful consideration of colour, combines 
visual awareness with the other senses. In ‘The Bloody Chamber’ 
the ‘misty blue’ (p. 8) turrets of the Marquis’s castle are presented 
with ‘seabirds mewing’ and the ‘green and purple, evanescent 
departures of the ocean’ (p. 8) to establish the main location for the 
tale. Her use of double negatives - ‘No room, no corridor that did 
not rustle with the sound of the sea’ (p. 9) - emphasises the way 
the landscape seems to melt into the interior while hinting that 
no part of the castle offers any kind of peace or tranquillity. This 
complements the description of the ‘refracted light from the waves’ 
on the walls to create the ‘luminous, murmurous castle’ (p. 9) as a 
place that inspires a sense of awe in the narrator: it is, literally, an 
awful place. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Jack Zipes's 
Breaking the Magic 
Spell: Radical 
Theories of Folk 
and Fairy Tales was 
first published in 
1979 (revised and 
extended in 2002), 
and his views are 
relevant to Carter's 
attitude to the oral 
tradition: 'Once 
there was a time 
when folk tales 
were part of 
communal property 
and told ... by 
gifted storytellers 
who gave vent to 
the frustration of 
the common people 
and embodied their 
needs and wishes in 
the folk narratives. 
... Today the folk 
tale as an oral art 
form has lost its 
aura ... and has 
given way to the 
literary fairy tale 
and other mass- 
mediated forms 
of storytelling' 
(2002, p. 6). 
The Bloody Chamber 95 

=== PDF PAGE 98 ===
Language and style Critical approaches 
Carter leaves spaces in the narratives for meaning to be supplied by 
the reader. Sometimes this is done simply through omitting details 
or not stating the obvious fact. In ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ Carter shapes 
an entire paragraph of incomplete sentences to describe the impact 
of the first glimpse of The Beast in his animal form. The paragraph - 
from ‘A great, feline, tawny shape’ to ‘eyes, like twin suns’ (p. 71) - 
functions as a partial list of the imposing features of The Beast and 
subtly conveys a sense of wonder. The narrative seems unable to 
complete a thought or encompass the majesty of the naked beast 
in coherent language. Carter deprives this narrator, otherwise so 
particularly adept with language, of coherent thought under the 
spell of the animal. 
QUESTION 
How far would you 
argue that Carter's 
writing style fits 
with her 
materialist 
principles? 
In other places the grammatical construction of Carter’s prose is 
convoluted and her meaning weaves through elaborately sustained 
multiple clauses. ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ makes extensive 
use of this kind of complex sentence construction. From the first 
sentence, the story tumbles out through a torrent of words 
describing the tangible ‘presences’ of the ‘revenants’ who haunt the 
village in ‘shadows’, ‘sound’ and ‘a sense of unease’ (p. 107). The 
‘beautiful queen of the vampires’ is introduced in one sweeping 
sentence that describes her ‘antique bridal gown’; her ‘dark, high 
house’; the ‘baleful posthumous existence’ of her ‘atrocious 
ancestors’ (p. 107); her sad and somewhat obsessive reading of 
Tarot cards; her desire to escape; and her fatal youth. The narrative 
continues to make use of this feature, as if the narrator simply 
cannot stop herself from embellishing the tale even as it is being 
told. This tale also makes use of the shortened sentence, found in 
the other stories, to create moments of tension or heightened impact 
of details in the story. If anything, the fluidity of the narrative is 
more abruptly shown in ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ by 
sentences such as ‘I will be very gentle’ (p. 119) and ‘Now it is dark’ 
(p. 120), because their brevity is in such stark and ominous contrast 
to the majority of the text. 
Elsewhere in her tales, Carter’s narrative prose approaches a more 
poetic voice, deliberately slipping between two registers of language 
that operate in different ways to create meaning. In ‘The Erl-King’ a 
passage describing the Erl-King’s eyes is punctuated by a line of text 
that stands alone: ‘Eyes green as apples. Green as dead sea fruit’ 
96 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 99 ===
Critical approaches Language and style 
(p. 103). Carter uses this technique of placing isolated similes to 
punctuate the rhythm of the narrative in other tales. In ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ Carter morbidly links the disconnected telephone line 
with the murders the Marquis has already committed, again in a line 
that stands alone as if poetically isolated: ‘Dead as his wives’ (p. 29). 
In ‘The Company of Wolves’ Carter makes an alliterative line 
create the emphasis required in converting rational fear of real 
danger into irrational superstition of imaginary terror: ‘Fear and 
flee the wolf; for, worst of all, the wolf may be more than he seems’ 
(p. 130). Again, this line stands alone in the text as a turning point 
in the narrative. 
One of the reasons Carter is appreciated so much by readers with 
a developed literary background is that they feel empowered, 
or perhaps flattered, by her use of allusions to a broad range of 
literature that they recognise. Of course, to operate at many levels 
of meaning is the sign of a skilful writer. By embedding such eclectic 
and often esoteric cultural knowledge into the stories, Carter 
deliberately courts literary recognition. It can be argued that this is 
the least attractive feature of her writing, not only because her self- 
conscious attempts at virtuosity are often unsuccessful, but also 
because - and this is richly ironic for an iconoclastic writer who 
wanted popular success and a broad audience - her work can seem 
tainted with the snobbery of cultural elitism. However, it is a 
feature that has contributed to her burgeoning posthumous 
popularity as a writer for study in academic institutions; the ‘self- 
conscious’ text is an interesting proposition for postmodern literary 
criticism. 
It is inevitable that the effect on readers of multiple layers of 
intertextuality can be arbitrary, and at times Carter can be self- 
indulgent, particularly in those moments where she is striving, 
and sometimes failing, to convey sensations of desire and rapture. 
In ‘The Erl-King’ a number of hyperbolical passages address the 
‘profane mysteries’ (p. 102) of desire and its effects: the description 
of the Erl-King’s embrace ‘made of water’ (p. 102) is lessened by 
the sentence that ends ‘the stream I have become’ (p. 102). Carter’s 
attempt to evoke sensations of emotional fluidity drowns in prose 
that recalls and mangles the cadences of John Keats’s poem ‘Ode to 
a Nightingale’. Her language paradoxically sometimes fails because 
CHECK 
THE POEM 
Keats's 'Ode to 
a Nightingale' 
(published in 1820) 
is a meditation on 
poetic experience. 
Overwhelmed by 
the immortal 
beauty of the 
nightingale's song, 
the observer at first 
longs for some drug 
that will allow him 
to 'dissolve' (21) and 
'fade away into the 
forest dim' (20) with 
the bird. By the end 
of the poem the 
observer has 
realised that he 
must accept 
sadness, and 
mortality. The 
poem ends on an 
ambiguous note: 
'Was it a vision, or 
a waking dream? / 
Fled is that music - 
Do I wake or sleep?' 
(79-80). 
The Bloody Chamber 97 

=== PDF PAGE 100 ===
Language and style Critical approaches 
CHECK 
W' THE NET 
You can read this 
interview online at 
www.dalkeyarchive. 
com: click on 
'Resources', 'Author 
Interviews' and 
'Angela Carter by 
Anna Katsavos'. 
CONTEXT 
Arthur Rackham 
(1867-1939) was 
a successful 
children's book 
illustrator, whose 
works include 
Fairy Tales of the 
Brothers Grimm 
(1900). The fantasy 
worlds he created 
were often sinister, 
full of gnarled 
trees and goblins 
and monsters. 
V___ 
it is inconsistently simplistic. In one sentence Carter, trying to 
encapsulate the contradictory response of consolation and 
devastation felt by the girl at her lover’s touch, follows the vivid 
simile of her heart being ‘naked as a stone on the roaring mattress’ 
with the limp phrase ‘the lovely, moony night’ (p. 102). 
An important aspect of Carter’s style is its entertaining playfulness 
and her willingness to enjoy using the ambiguities of meaning 
that exist in familiar, colloquial or conventional language. In 
‘An Interview with Angela Carter’ by Anna Katsavos, originally 
published in The Review of Contemporary Fiction, 14:3, Fall 1994, 
pp. 11-17, Carter comments on the linguistic amusements she 
finds in her writing: ‘there are a whole lot of verbal games in 
[“The Company of Wolves”] that I really enjoy doing, “the deer 
departed,” [p. 129] for example. People very rarely notice these ... 
sort of private jokes with myself and with whoever notices, and I 
used to enjoy doing that very much’ (p. 15). 
Metaphor 
The improper, or unexpected, application of names or descriptive 
terms to objects in order to create a surprising effect is at the heart 
of Carter’s highly ‘improper’ literary art. Though there are many 
metaphoric images employed by Carter, there are a few common 
metaphors that unite many of these stories. Perhaps the most 
striking are the Gothic elements of the stories that emphasise 
meanings associated with journeys from the exterior to the 
interior, penetration of secret spaces, rites of passage, 
transformations and quests. The metaphor of the forest — so 
central to the imaginative landscape of the fairy tale - as the 
depiction of the unknown or the threat of the wilderness beyond 
human civilisation recurs again and again. 
This idea of a wilderness or inhospitable landscape does not always 
appear as a woodland. In ‘The Bloody Chamber’ the new bride’s 
journey terminates at ‘an unknown, never-to-be visited station’ 
(p. 6). The Beast in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ is first encountered 
in the garden of a mansion isolated in a ‘snow-filled’ (p. 44) world. 
In ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ ‘Beauty’ travels across a ‘wide, flat dish of 
98 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 101 ===
Critical approaches Language and style 
snow’ (p. 62) to The Beast’s ‘megalomaniac citadel’ amid a ‘dead’ 
world (p. 63). In ‘The Erl-King’ it is almost as if the Erl-King and 
his domain are interchangeable: ‘the wood swallows you up’ (p. 96) 
and the Erl-King is ‘the tender butcher’ waiting to ‘skin the rabbit’ 
(p. 100). In ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ the vampire’s castle 
emerges out of the ‘jungle’ of ‘enormous thickets’ (p. 114) of rose 
bushes. In ‘The Werewolf’ the forest resumes its identity as a place 
of ‘Cold; tempest; wild beasts’ (p. 126), while in ‘The Company of 
Wolves’ the forest is a place of ‘teeming perils’ (p. 130) filled with 
‘assassins’ (p. 129): ‘ghosts, hobgoblins, ogres ... witches’ and ‘the 
wolf’ (p. 130). 
The ruined castle, the iconic image of the Gothic genre, is featured 
in one way or another in all of the stories: as a grand symbol of 
power and wealth, or as a representation of the domestic shelter 
from the challenges of the world or a bulwark against the 
psychological pressures that accompany the child becoming an 
adult. The other dominant metaphor is that of ‘the animal’ in 
opposition to ‘the human’; this metaphor is a particularly unstable 
‘figure of speech’ in Carter’s stories. Carter does not have one 
particular view of the relationship of animal and human in these 
stories, and sometimes her view is positive and sometimes it is 
negative. This is one reason why thematic interconnection across 
the collection of tales as a whole is not a simple matter. For example, 
should each of the various transformations of man or woman into 
beast be understood to signify the same view of human society and 
human nature? 
In approaching these stories and considering their meaning, the 
central metaphors of ‘the journey’, ‘the home’, ‘the wilderness’ 
and ‘the beast’ provide a basis for Carter’s rearrangement of the 
traditional tales. The old, patriarchal society she writes to expose 
and challenge is hostile to change, so these ideas are necessarily 
bound up with conflict and contradiction. Whether it is the 
transition from child to adult through life, from innocence through 
experience to new knowledge and understanding, from powerless 
victim to empowered individual, Carter employs a powerful matrix 
of ideas to deal with sex, class and gender as matters of life and 
death. As a feminist and a socialist writer, in some senses, Carter 
CHECK 
THE NET 
To view examples of 
Rackham's work, 
including his 
illustrations for 
'Little Red Riding 
Hood' and 
'Bluebeard', visit 
www.surlalunefairy 
tales.com and 
search for 'Arthur 
Rackham'. 
The Bloody Chamber 99 

=== PDF PAGE 102 ===
Language and style Critical approaches 
Metaphor continued 
CONTEXT 
The first written 
evidence of the 
name 'Mother 
Goose' as a teller 
of tales for 
children, is in Jean 
Loret's La Muse 
historique (1650), 
a weekly gazette. 
v___J 
CONTEXT 
Shakespeare's 
Macbeth broods 
on the nature 
of crime and 
punishment after 
Banquo's ghost 
attends the feast: 
'It will have blood, 
they say: blood 
will have blood' 
(Macbeth, Act III 
Scene 5). As a 
literary symbol, 
blood may serve 
many different 
meanings but 
has historically 
represented life, 
truth, family, 
purity and so 
forth, conveying a 
sense of shared or 
exclusive identity. 
Its connotations 
of death, sacrifice 
and martyrdom 
are present in 
many different 
belief systems. 
v _ 
saw herself as restoring a material basis to the myths of fairy tale 
that, over time, through male narration, had lost the historical 
connection with the original circumstances that created them 
(see Origins). Fairy tales have a moral and didactic purpose. 
They function as warnings and instruction to children, based 
on the collective experience of people with little power in the 
world, on how best to recognise and survive predictable dangers. 
Carter, a modern-day version of ‘Mother Goose’, makes the 
fairy tale a metaphor for her politicised analysis of social class 
and gender. 
Imagery, allusion and intertextuality 
Several central images are reworked throughout most of the stories 
in the collection. Blood is a key image that is obviously related to 
the Gothic element of the tales. It is related at different points to 
menstruation, sexual maturity, the loss of virginity, wounds, pain, 
death and sexual pleasure. In ‘The Bloody Chamber’ the idea of 
the stain or the mark of shame is transferred to the woman by her 
handling of the key to the chamber and her knowledge of its gory 
contents. In ‘The Snow-Child’ it is the evidence of desire after the 
execution of the passion. In ‘The Lady of the blouse of Love’ 
blood is the vampire’s means of survival and the means of her 
release. 
Flowers provide key images in several of the stories: lilies in 
‘The Bloody Chamber’ signify death and mourning through their 
association with funerals; the rose as a symbol of love and beauty 
- also agony and danger - features in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’, 
‘The Snow Child’ and ‘The Lady of the Flouse of Love’, to very 
different effects. The white rose brings the Beast and Beauty 
together in ‘The Courtship of Mr Lyon’ and symbolises a link of 
some kind of purity between the two: ‘one white, perfect rose’ 
(p. 47) is robbed from the Beast’s garden by the father for his 
daughter; she returns white roses when away from the Beast and 
knows ‘perfect freedom’ (p. 51); her flowers are later discovered to 
be ‘all dead’ (p. 54). For the Countess in ‘The Snow Child’, the rose 
is a weapon. For the heroic cyclist in ‘The Lady of the House of 
Love’, the rose is a powerful but unrealisable portent of impending 
catastrophe on an unimaginable scale. The rose is a potent symbol in 
loo The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 103 ===
Critical approaches Language and style 
the literature and oral tradition of many cultures. The petals of the 
rose, their perfume and colour, have a particular significance. The 
red rose is associated with blood and passion; it is mostly, though 
not always, identified with the female. The many layered petals of 
the rose, likened by artists to female genitalia, have been interpreted 
as being a symbol for the complexity of the universe. In modern 
times the beauty of the rose, the sweetness of its scent and the 
pricking defensive thorns symbolise the paradoxical nature of 
love: beautiful, intoxicating and painful. 
The caged songbird, a potent symbol of the artificial restraints 
placed on human behaviour and the loss of individual freedom, 
particularly for women, is used in ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ 
and functions as a major plot device, in so far as there is any plot, in 
‘The Erl-King’. 
The wolf - ‘Mister Wolf’ - is examined by Carter as a key symbol 
from the imagery of fairy tales and folklore to be subverted. The 
wolf, whose symbolic meaning is derived from the very real 
dangers posed by the wild animal to human beings in their early 
civilisations, represents the threat of unknown and uncontrollable 
nature. The wolf also represents greed, deceit and insatiable 
appetites. There are fewer references to the bravery and strength of 
the wolf as positive attributes, though the female wolf is often 
portrayed as a generous and protective mother. On a simple level, 
wolf tales suggest that children should be wary of strangers. In a 
Freudian, psychoanalytical interpretation, the wolf in fairy tales 
represents a coded acknowledgement of the dangers of suppressed 
or repressed sexual desire. As the embodiment of specific and 
immediate danger, the wolf is an ever present predator. Carter’s 
various attempts at presenting ‘the wolf’ (or rather presenting the 
different dangers she perceives in modern society in the guise of ‘the 
wolf’ in her stories) lead to contradictions that are not easily 
resolved. In ‘The Werewolf’ the threat is female but defeated; in 
‘Wolf-Alice’ the wolf is humanised and reconciled; in ‘The 
Company of Wolves’ the threat is male and the wolf is dehumanised 
to achieve a reconciliation. The Beast in ‘The Courtship of Mr 
Lyon’ and ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ is a variation on the idea of the 
werewolf. In presenting a variety of metamorphoses between 
woman, beast and man, Carter is exploring what it is to be human 
and questioning whether it is possible to understand the reality of 
human nature. 
CONTEXT 
Associated with 
Aphrodite and 
Venus, the Greek 
and Roman 
goddesses of 
love in classical 
mythology, the 
rose in Christian 
symbolism is a 
reference to the 
Virgin Mary, who is 
also known as the 
Mystical Rose. 
V_/ 
CONTEXT 
The psychoanalyst 
Sigmund Freud 
(1856-1939) is 
considered to be 
one of the most 
influential thinkers 
of the modern 
era for his 
investigations into 
the workings of 
the unconscious 
mind and his 
studies on 
repression and 
sexual drives. 
Freud considered 
myths to be an 
expression of 
repressed 
thoughts. 
V___/ 
The Bloody Chamber 101 

=== PDF PAGE 104 ===
Language and style Critical approaches 
Imagery, allusion and intertextuality continued 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
Blood and Roses 
(1960), directed by 
Roger Vadim, is an 
adaptation of Le 
Fanu's 'Carmilla'. 
Another version 
of this tale is the 
Hammer film The 
Vampire Lovers 
(1970), directed by 
Roy Ward Baker. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Bruno Bettelheim 
gives a Freudian 
view in The Uses 
of Enchantment: 
The Meaning and 
Importance of Fairy 
Tales (1976), 
examining the 
instructive function 
of fairy tales from a 
psychoanalytical 
perspective. 'If we 
want to understand 
our true selves, we 
must become 
familiar with the 
inner workings of 
our mind. If we want 
to function well, we 
have to integrate the 
discordant tendencies 
that are inherent in 
our being. Isolating 
these tendencies 
and projecting them 
into separate figures 
... is one way fairy 
tales help us visualize 
and thus better 
grasp what goes on 
within us.' 
Carter’s reliance on allusion is not so straightforwardly 
encapsulated. Helen Simpson notes in the introduction to the 2006 
Vintage edition that annotating The Bloody Chamber in detail 
would be a lengthy task (p. xiv). Sometimes Carter’s references to 
works of literature and art are open and direct; often the allusions 
are entwined in several overlapping references that hint at some 
mocking play with meaning. Other explicit references are totally 
fictitious, as if Carter is daring the reader to challenge her erudite 
knowledge of literature and culture while simultaneously mocking 
her own tendency to be esoteric. 
When Carter gives the Romanian aristocrat in ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’ the name Carmilla, she makes a knowing reference to the 
Gothic novella ‘Carmilla’ published in 1872 by Joseph Sheridan Le 
Fanu (1814-73) that featured a predatory lesbian vampire some 
twenty-five years before Bram Stoker’s Dracula appeared. In a 
similar vein, when Carter refers to ‘Vlad the Impaler who picnicked 
on corpses in the forests of Transylvania’ (p. 109) as the ancestor 
and source of the vampire beauty in ‘The Lady of the House of 
Love’, she is recalling a legend that distorts history for the benefit of 
good storytelling, as this account of Vlad Tepes is derived from 
propaganda and the alleged connection between the fifteenth- 
century historical ruler and Stoker’s villain Count Dracula is 
disputable. 
Carter does not confine her allusions to the so-called higher forms 
of culture, literature and art. Children’s literature, horror movies, 
luxury commodities, recognisable brand names and icons of fashion 
are all called into service to support her storytelling. 
Origins 
Although Carter generally takes one particular fairy or folk tale as 
the basis of each story in this collection, recognisable elements of 
other tales constantly reappear at various moments. Carter almost 
makes a seamless connection between all the stories, as if they could 
all be traced back to one great original story that has been long 
forgotten, yet somehow still needs to be told, in different and 
repeating ways. 
102 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 105 ===
Critical approaches Origins 
The traditions of the fairy tales that form the basis of Carter’s tales 
in The Bloody Chamber can be traced back through the centuries 
in various forms across Europe and beyond in the oral tradition. 
In the sixteenth century writers began to make records of these 
tales, and as print technology advanced so the tales became known 
in particular forms, giving rise to textual evidence of adaptation 
and rewriting at different times. Giovanni Francesco Straparola’s 
The Facetious Nights (published in two parts as Le Piacevoli Notti 
in 1550 and 1553, and also referred to as The Pleasant Nights) 
introduced various folk tales to European literature, and certainly 
influenced later literary versions of the tales. Carter’s chief source 
is the seventeenth-century French writer Charles Perrault 
(1628-1703), whose tales provide the source material ‘Bluebeard’, 
‘Puss-in-Boots’, ‘Sleeping Beauty’ and ‘Little Red Riding Hood’. 
Though Perrault is the most well-known source, his versions are 
pre-dated by other writers, and the earliest known written version 
of ‘Puss-in-Boots’ comes from the sixteenth century. 
Later versions of most of these stories were presented by the 
German academics known as the Brothers Grimm in the nineteenth 
century. The Disney animation features of these tales (recently 
satirised in the Shrek series of computer-aided animated films) are 
yet another form of the tales to be taken into account. Some obscure 
sources are cited for particular stories. While ‘The Snow Child’ is 
linked by Helen Simpson (in her introduction to the 2006 Vintage 
edition of The Bloody Chamber, p. xvi) to an unpublished variant 
of ‘Snow White’ collected by the Brothers Grimm, it bears direct 
resemblance to the story ‘Snegorotchka’ incorporated in the French 
illustrator Edmund Dulac’s Fairy Book (1916), introduced as a 
Russian fairy tale. Yet Carter’s use of elements of the tale is very far 
from the sentiments expressed in ‘Snegorotchka’. This is just one 
example of how difficult it can be to define the origin of tales whose 
existence in the oral tradition pre-dates their first written record by a 
considerable margin. 
Carter freely interweaves references and direct quotations from the 
familiar refrains and phraseology of other well-known children’s 
tales: Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (1865) and 
Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There (1871) are 
both drawn upon directly and indirectly in several of her tales; the 
CHECK 
THE NET 
Straparola 
(c. 1490-1557), 
according to 
W. G. Waters, who 
translated an 
edition of The 
Facetious Nights, 
'is one of those 
fortunate men of 
letters concerning 
whom next to 
nothing is known'. 
An online version 
of Waters's 1901 
translation of 
The Facetious Nights 
can be found at 
www.surlalunefairy 
tales.com - search 
for 'The Facetious 
Nights'. 
CONTEXT 
In 'Snegorotchka' 
a childless couple 
make a snow child 
that magically 
transforms into a 
little girl. They 
take her home and 
all live happily 
until the spring 
comes and she 
melts away. It is a 
sad tale of love 
and loss, relating 
death to the 
passing of the 
seasons and also 
showing how, 
though parents 
can make children, 
they cannot 
always keep them 
for ever. 
V_/ 
The Bloody Chamber 103 

=== PDF PAGE 106 ===
Origins Critical approaches 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Edmund Dulac 
(1882-1953) was 
one of the most 
influential 
illustrators of 
children's books 
during the early 
twentieth century. 
His Fairy Book 
(1916) contains 
stories from around 
the world and has 
been reprinted 
several times, as the 
illustrations are 
considered to be 
highly influential in 
the art of children's 
literature. 
giant from ‘Jack the Giant-Killer’ (or ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ or the 
Grimms’ ‘The Brave Little Tailor’) makes his presence felt in ‘The 
Lady of the House of Love’. But it is quite striking that, while 
Carter freely draws upon the magical element of shape-shifting 
creatures, the only fairy or magical being in the collection that is 
taken directly from fairy tale is the wood spirit depicted in ‘The 
Erl-King’. This tale is derived from Germanic and Scandinavian lore 
concerning evil elf creatures that lead children to their destruction 
in the forest. 
While this legacy of stories for children is Carter’s chosen vehicle 
for her writing, and its heritage can be traced to a certain extent, the 
stories are neither backward-looking nor nostalgic. Neither can the 
collection be adequately summarised as an attempt to reclaim those 
old stories for a modern era. The stories that Carter chooses to tell 
are her stories; stories of a twentieth-century woman writing ‘to 
please herself’. In the 1970s that intention was a revolutionary 
manifesto for change, no matter how idealistic or limited in its 
achievements it may seem from the vantage point of the 
twenty-first century. 
104 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 107 ===
Part Four 
Critical perspectives 
Reading critically 
This section provides a range of critical viewpoints and perspectives 
on The Bloody Chamber and gives a broad overview of key debates, 
interpretations and theories proposed since the collection was 
published. It is important to bear in mind the variety of 
interpretations and responses this text has produced, many of 
them shaped by the critics’ own backgrounds and historical 
contexts. 
No single view of the text should be seen as dominant - it is 
important that you arrive at your own judgements by questioning 
the perspectives described, and by developing your own critical 
insights. Objective analysis is a skill achieved through coupling 
close reading with an informed understanding of the key ideas, 
related texts and background information relevant to the text. These 
elements are all crucial in enabling you to assess the interpretations 
of other readers, and even to view works of criticism as texts in 
themselves. The ability to read critically will serve you well both 
in your study of the text and in any critical writing, presentation 
or further work you undertake. 
Original reception 
Ellen Cronan Rose in ‘Through the Looking Glass: When Women 
Tell Fairy Tales’ (in The Voyage In: Fictions of Female Development, 
edited by Elizabeth Abel, Marianne Hirsch and Elizabeth Langland, 
1983, pp. 207-27) was one of the first critics to give a serious critical 
response to The Bloody Chamber, approving the reversal of 
stereotypical gender roles as ‘a critique of the idea of adult 
womanhood sanctioned by patriarchy and a suggested alternative 
to it’. This approval was not shared by Patricia Duncker in 
‘Re-Imagining the Fairy Tales: Angela Carter’s Bloody Chambers’ 
(in Literature and History, 10:1, 1984, pp. 3-14), and she pulled no 
punches in her attack on Carter: ‘But the infernal trap inherent in 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
A Beginner's Guide 
to Critical Reading: 
Readings for 
Students by 
Richard Jacobs 
(2001) provides 
entertaining 
commentary on a 
range of literary 
texts. It will help 
you see how 
criticism and theory 
can enhance your 
own enjoyment and 
appreciation of 
literature. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In After Theory 
(2003) Terry 
Eagleton states 
that'one of 
the towering 
achievements of 
cultural theory has 
been to establish 
gender and 
sexuality as 
legitimate objects 
of study, as well 
as matters of 
insistent political 
importance' (p. 3). 
The Bloody Chamber 105 

=== PDF PAGE 108 ===
Original reception Critical perspectives 
CONTEXT 
In March 1992 
Salman Rushdie 
described Carter 
as 'a thumber of 
noses, a defiler of 
sacred cows. She 
loved nothing so 
much as ... blithe 
... nonconformity. 
Her books 
unshackle us ... 
draw their 
strength, their 
vitality, from 
all that is 
unrighteous, 
illegitimate, low' 
('Angela Carter, 
1940-92: A Very 
Good Wizard, a 
Very Dear Friend', 
New York Times 
Book Review, 
8 March 1992). 
V_ v 
®CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read some 
of these obituaries 
online: type 'Angela 
Carter obituary' into 
a search engine. 
the fairy tale, which fits the form to its purpose, to be the carrier 
of ideology, proves too complex and pervasive to avoid.’ In other 
words, Duncker believed Carter had attempted an impossible and 
ultimately pointless task, in that the form of the fairy tale cannot 
be used without the new version being contaminated by the 
ideological content of the original tale. The moral values of the 
stories are embedded in their structure, and Carter’s adaptations and 
changes cannot, according to Duncker, escape that fact. To suggest 
Carter’s stories are trapped by the content of old tales seems, 
however, to ignore what Carter has achieved with them. Changing 
the form of something involves a change in content and meaning: 
a story told by one person will gain very different meanings if it is 
told by another person. Duncker was not the only critic who would 
have preferred women writers not to re-examine the tales of the 
past, but this scornful attitude would not stop other women writers 
attempting their own versions of fairy tales in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Later criticism 
On Angela Carter’s death in 1992, many obituaries were written in 
praise of her writing. However, Merja Makinen, in ‘Angela Carter’s 
The Bloody Chamber and the Decolonization of Feminine 
Sexuality’ (in Feminist Review, 42, Autumn 1992, pp. 2-15), argued 
against the obituarists who eulogised her as a ‘benign magician’, 
creating a mystic aura around her craft as a writer. This approach, 
Makinen suggested, misrepresented the true power of Carter’s 
writing: ‘Carter’s work has consistently dealt with representations 
of the physical abuse of women in phallocentric cultures, of women 
alienated from themselves within the male gaze, and conversely of 
women who grab their sexuality and fight back, of women troubled 
by and even empowered by their own violence’ (p. 3). Renewed 
critical interest in Carter after her death was marked by two events 
in 1994: an academic conference on her work at the University of 
York; and the publication of Flesh and the Mirror: Essays on the 
Art of Angela Carter, edited by Lorna Sage. Sarah Gamble’s 
Angela Carter: A Literary Life (2005), however, notes the way 
that posthumous fame ironically would have been seen as little 
consolation by Carter herself, who was ambitious for recognition 
in her lifetime. 
106 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 109 ===
Critical perspectives Later criticism 
In 1998 Aidan Day in Angela Carter: The Rational Glass felt the 
need to preface his views with the oxymoronic statement ‘Carter’s 
fiction is a bit extreme’ (p. 1), and he is clearly ill at ease with aspects 
of sexuality represented by Carter in The Bloody Chamber, 
particularly ‘female sexuality’ (p. 151). Day believes this to be 
‘difficult ground ... for a male critic’ and he later disqualifies 
himself from commenting on Carter’s representation of female 
desire on the grounds that ‘As a man, I am not competent to judge 
the psychological veracity or otherwise of this image of positive 
female response to male pornographic attention’ (p. 160). It would 
be fair to argue, however, that competence in criticism has nothing 
to do with gender; and Day fails to see the irony in his evasiveness. 
It is precisely his use of gender as an artificial barrier to 
understanding that Carter seeks to overthrow in her stories. 
The controversy concerning the literary merits of Angela Carter’s 
work is far from over, but her position as an object of academic 
study and debate is now an established fact. Alison Easton points out 
in Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essays (2000) that though 
‘there was only a handful of studies before the late 1980s’, the range 
of critical opinion has widened dramatically since her death, despite 
the fact that this is ‘not a long time to establish a field of study’ 
(pp. 5, 6). Dominic Head caustically comments in The Cambridge 
Introduction to Modern British Fiction, 1950—2000 (2002): ‘Angela 
Carter is a significant writer; but she does not deserve the status of 
(by some margin) the most-written-about post-war British novelist. 
If the number of academic theses devoted to an author were to taken 
as a reliable measure of the author’s relative importance, Carter 
would emerge as the single literary giant of the period’ (pp. 3-4). 
Other critics have found Carter’s tendency to return to certain tales 
more intriguing. Jacqueline Pearson in her foreword to Re-Visiting 
Angela Carter: Texts, Contexts, Intertexts, edited by Rebecca 
Munford (2006), emphasises the reiterative nature of her creative 
intertextuality: ‘If for Carter allusion helps to provide a language 
for ambiguity, one way of achieving this is to tell and retell certain 
central narratives’ (p. ix). Munford in ‘Angela Carter and the 
Politics of Intertextuality’, her introduction to this 2006 work, goes 
some way to explaining why the academic study of Carter has 
expanded exponentially: ‘the alluring literariness of Carter’s writing 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
The relationship 
between teller and 
tale is always 
significant. In 'The 
Pardoner's Tale' 
from Chaucer's 
Centerbury Tales 
(c. 1387), one of the 
earliest texts in 
English literature 
that takes the form 
of a competition in 
storytelling, the 
moral lesson 'love 
of wealth is the root 
of all evil' is told by 
a character who 
sells forgiveness 
and fake religious 
relics. It too is in 
many respects 
a Gothic tale 
(see Literacy 
background: The 
Gothic tradition). 
The Bloody Chamber 107 

=== PDF PAGE 110 ===
Later criticism Critical perspectives 
CHECK 
the NET 
A comprehensive 
bibliographical 
resource, the 
Feminist Theory 
Website, can 
be found at 
www.cddc.vt.edu/ 
feminism 
is most often at work as part of a feminist analysis of the social 
fictions which shape identity and experience’ (p. 16). Typically, this 
seems to downplay the point that Carter is more interested in 
attacking the concrete social conditions that produce and maintain 
those fictions. Gina Wisker in ‘Behind Locked Doors: Angela 
Carter, Horror and the Influence of Edgar Allan Poe’ (in Re- 
Visiting Angela Carter: Texts, Contexts, Intertexts, edited by 
Munford, 2006) draws attention to the influence of Poe, but points 
out a crucial difference in that ‘where pleasure and pain are 
separated in Poe, in Carter their sexual connection is explicit; sex 
and torture are aligned’ (pp. 189-90). 
Jago Morrison in Contemporary Fiction (2003) summarises The 
Bloody Chamber as ‘an archaeological investigation of gender 
representation, coupled with a set of creative attempts at subversion’, 
thereby assigning it to a neat, but dismissive, pigeonhole in feminist 
fiction (p. 168). Morrison seems to regard Carter’s stories as 
academic exercises in creative writing that have failed. 
Sarah Gamble in Angela Carter: A Literary Life (2005) observes a 
neat psycho-biographical connection in the way that the fairy-tale 
narrative mode ‘places the figure of the story-teller centre stage’ 
(p. 156) and how Carter created a new public identity as a 
storyteller following the publication of The Bloody Chamber. 
Gamble recognises that Carter won this identity on her own terms, 
as ‘pleasing her audience by providing them with a comfortably 
reassuring read did not feature on her list of priorities’ (p. 156). 
Gamble asserts what she believes is evidence of the enduring value 
of Carter’s work: ‘Most of Carter’s writing remains in print: it is 
read by general readers and studied at universities, and has lost 
none of its capacity to shock, startle and delight’ (p. 205). 
Contemporary approaches 
Feminism 
Feminist criticism has many different strands - radical, bourgeois, 
lesbian, heterosexual - each of which view Carter in very different 
ways according to their own political and sexual orientation. 
Patricia Duncker in ‘Re-Imagining the Fairy Tales: Angela Carter’s 
108 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 111 ===
Critical perspectives Contemporary approaches 
Bloody Chambers’ (in Literature and History, 10:1, 1984, pp. 3-14) 
voices a particularly hostile perspective: ‘Carter envisages women’s 
sensuality simply as a response to male arousal. She has no 
conception of women’s sexuality as autonomous desire.’ Certainly 
Carter won little praise from feminist critics for The Sadeian 
Woman (1979), and the reaction to her attitude towards the Marquis 
de Sade and sexuality in that work was applied to The Bloody 
Chamber. Particular attention was given to Carter’s suggestion in 
The Sadeian Woman that there might be a worthy social role for a 
‘moral pornographer’ (‘a phrase’, she later remarked in an interview 
with Anna Katsavos, ‘that got me into a lot of trouble with ... some 
of the sisters’). Carter writes in The Sadeian Woman, in the first 
chapter ‘Polemical Preface: Pornography in the Service of Women’, 
that a ‘moral pornographer might use pornography as a critique of 
current relations between the sexes’. In her view, such an artist 
‘would not be the enemy of women, perhaps because he might 
begin to penetrate to the heart of the contempt for women that 
distorts our culture’. Carter also thought that the writings of the 
Marquis de Sade suggested the possibility of ‘moral pornography’ 
because she discerned in the libertarian aspects of his work ‘an 
ideology not inimical to women’. This was not a popular view 
among feminists and remains controversial. Andrea Dworkin in 
Pornography: Men Possessing Women (1981) denounces Carter as a 
‘pseudo-feminist’ (p. 84); Susanne Kappeler in The Pornography of 
Representation (1986) accuses Carter of being cut off from reality 
and of attempting a kind of literary rehabilitation of de Sade, ‘the 
multiple rapist and murderer’ (p. 133). Duncker simply dismisses 
Carter’s belief that de Sade ‘put pornography in the service of 
women’ as ‘utter nonsense’ (in ‘Re-Imagining the Fairy Tales: 
Angela Carter’s Bloody Chambers’, p. 8). 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In The Penelopiad 
(2005) Margaret 
Atwood revisits 
Homer's The Odyssey 
from the viewpoint 
of Penelope, the 
long-suffering wife 
of Odysseus. 
Nanette Altevers in ‘Gender Matters in The Sadeian Woman 
(in The Review of Contemporary Fiction, 14:3, Fall 1994, pp. 18-23) 
argues in Carter’s defence that ‘Carter’s critique of the ideology of 
pornography is intricately and inevitably bound up with her 
critique of myth’ (p. 20). And Altevers emphasises this point by 
quoting Carter’s The Sadeian Woman-, ‘all pornography derives 
directly from myth’. This interpretation of the idea of the ‘moral 
pornographer’ is particularly pertinent to the stories in The Bloody 
Chamber because Carter examines the myths embedded in the 
The Bloody Chamber 109 

=== PDF PAGE 112 ===
Contemporary approaches Critical perspectives 
Feminism continued 
CHECK 
THE NET 
You can read Sage's 
obituary on Carter at 
http://books.guardian. 
co.uk - go to the 
Archive search and 
type in 'The Soaring 
Imagination Lorna 
Sage'. 
CONTEXT 
Postmodernist 
literary theory 
developed in the 
latter part of the 
twentieth century, 
combining various 
philosophies and 
approaching 
literature with 
profound 
scepticism. It is 
identified with a 
relativist world 
view, hostile to the 
materialist view 
that objective 
truth exists and is 
available to human 
understanding 
through sensation. 
A good 
introduction is 
Niall Lucy's 
Postmodern 
Literary Theory: 
An Introduction 
(1997). 
v _/ 
fairy-tale form by making use of the sexual relationships embedded 
within them. Her stories challenge the convention that sexual 
licence is a male prerogative - she is clearly interested in how the 
fairy tale as a cultural artefact transmits ‘contempt for women’, and 
in the tales constructs a critique of ‘the current relations between 
the sexes’. It is not unreasonable to consider to what extent Carter is 
attempting the role she outlined for a ‘moral pornographer’ in The 
Bloody Chamber. As Lorna Sage commented in her obituary ‘The 
Soaring Imagination’, published in the Guardian (17 February 
1992), Carter’s ‘exercise in cultural history. The Sadeian Woman ... 
shocked some people into the realisation that she knew exactly 
what she was doing’. 
Sally Keenan’s ‘Angela Carter’s The Sadeian Woman: Feminism 
as Treason’ (in The Infernal Desires of Angela Carter: Fiction, 
Femininity, Feminism, edited by Joseph Bristow and Trev Lynn 
Broughton, 1997) examines the connections between Carter’s 
revisions of fairy tales and her ‘scandalous liaison with the book 
on Sade’. Her view of that connection is provocative: ‘If Carter’s 
analysis of Sade’s texts emphasises their fairy-tale-like abstraction, 
then her revision of traditional fairy tales serves to highlight the 
pornographic nature of the stereotypes of women that they have 
re-circulated.’ 
Sarah Gamble argues in The Fiction of Angela Carter: A Reader’s 
Guide to Essential Criticism (2001) that for the later critics, such 
as Lucie Armitt, ‘the issue of sexual politics is removed from the 
central position it has hitherto occupied in analyses of this text’ 
(p. 132) as, under the influence of postmodernist literary theory, 
commentaries become more interested in the shifting and 
interrelated forms of the narratives that constitute one whole text 
for the reader. Armitt insists in ‘The Fragile Frames of The Bloody 
Chamber (in The Infernal Desires of Angela Carter, edited by 
Bristow and Broughton, 1997) that ‘one of the major problems 
facing the reader of these ten stories is that they seem always to be 
dissolving into each other’ (p. 97). 
In ‘The Fiction of Angela Carter’ (in Contemporary British Fiction, 
edited by Richard J. Lane, Rod Mengham and Philip Tew, 2003) 
Robert Eaglestone sees a parallel between Carter’s shifting 
uo The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 113 ===
Critical perspectives Contemporary approaches 
perspectives and Rosi Braidotti’s concept of ‘nomadic feminism’, 
which he defines as ‘Never at home in orthodoxies or in final 
statements, it maintains a balance between the need to act to change 
the world and the need to think through these actions and the world 
in an open-ended way’ (p. 206). 
Marxism 
Marxism is, above all, the philosophy for social change based on the 
economic analysis of capitalism established by Karl Marx (1818-83) 
and Friedrich Engels (1820-95) in the nineteenth century. Culture 
and ideology have always been seen as arenas of political conflict 
by Marxists, and this tradition of cultural commentary has since 
spawned an entirely academic school of Marxism that confines its 
revolutionary activity to the contemplation of literature using the 
formulas and phraseology of Marxist political analysis. 
From the early part of the twentieth century, different attitudes to 
art, culture and literature have been present in Marxist thought. The 
philosophy of Marxism is defined as dialectical materialism. This 
implies an understanding of the world being in constant movement 
and change through contradictory processes. The philosophical 
term ‘dialectical’ is related to the art of debating propositions 
through contradiction to achieve clear understanding. Marxism 
sees all things as containing their own ‘dialectic’ of contradiction, 
a conflict of opposites, that will govern their future development. 
Eeon Trotsky (1879—1940), a leading revolutionary in Russia in 
1917, viewed literature with dialectical materialist understanding in 
his article ‘The Social Roots and the Social Function of Literature’ 
(1923): ‘Artistic creation is always a complicated turning inside out 
of old forms, under the influence of new stimuli which originate 
outside of art.’ It is not difficult to see a connection between this 
statement and Carter’s achievements in The Bloody Chamber, 
especially the reference to the subversion of old forms. 
When the Communist movement split in the 1920s and Stalinist 
‘socialist realism’ was dogmatically adopted as the new orthodoxy 
by Soviet critics, many so-called Marxists in Western society 
followed the party line. Literature was only considered ‘politically 
correct’ if it depicted reality in certain ways. Anything else was 
routinely denounced as ‘bourgeois reactionary fantasy’. This has 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
The Cambridge 
Companion to 
Hegel (1993), 
edited by Frederick 
C. Beiser, provides 
an overview of the 
philosopher whose 
'dialectic' was so 
important to the 
development of 
Marx's and Engels's 
thinking. Carter 
would have been 
familiar with 
Marxism being 
described as 
dialectical 
materialism; Aidan 
Day in Angela 
Carter: The Rational 
Glass (1998) quotes 
Carter describing 
The Infernal Desire 
Machines of Doctor 
Hoffman (1972) 
having a 'dialectic 
between passion 
and reason, which it 
resolves in favour of 
reason' (p. 65). 
CONTEXT 
The rise of Stalinist 
'socialist realism' as 
the only allowable 
form of artistic 
expression 
accompanied the 
suppression of 
political freedom 
generally in the 
USSR. 
v _ 
The Bloody Chamber ill 

=== PDF PAGE 114 ===
Contemporary approaches Critical perspectives 
Marxism continued 
QUESTION 
If 'this world is all 
there is', why does 
Carter make 
impossible magic a 
feature of so many 
of her tales? 
QUESTION 
What, if anything, 
does Carter have 
to say about the 
fear of death in 
The Bloody 
Chamber? 
been a dominant tendency in Marxist literary criticism, though 
not the only one. Consequently, many adherents of the school of 
Marxist literary criticism exemplified by Georg Lukacs have real 
difficulties in dealing with works of fantasy such as The Bloody 
Chamber. Applying a simplistic definition of Marxism to her blend 
of materialism and fantasy does little to help readers understand 
either Carter or Marxism. 
Robert Eaglestone in ‘The Fiction of Angela Carter’ (in 
Contemporary British Fiction, edited by Richard J. Lane, Rod 
Mengham and Philip Tew, 2003) believes that Carter’s work is not 
‘strictly material in a political (say, Marxist sense)’ (p. 204). Carter 
was a materialist (her world outlook being ‘this world is all there is’) 
and would certainly have agreed with Trotsky’s view that ‘However 
fantastic art may be, it cannot have at its disposal any other material 
except that which is given to it by the world of three dimensions 
and by the narrower world of class society’ (‘The Social Roots and 
the Social Function of Literature’, 1923). Trotsky’s 1924 speech 
against political control in the field of imaginative literature insisted 
that Marxists should recognise ‘the fundamental relationship 
between a reader and a work of art. ... Let us take, for instance, 
such an elementary psychological feeling as fear of death. This 
feeling is characteristic not only of man but also of animals. In man 
it first found simple articulate expression, and later also artistic 
expression’ (‘Class and Art - Culture Under the Dictatorship’). 
In approaching The Bloody Chamber from the perspective of 
Marxist literary criticism, the text becomes a prism which refracts 
the social conditions that produced it: the political death of the 
post-war social consensus in Britain (see Historical background). 
Carter voices opposition to what she perceived to be reactionary 
forces in society, from a feminist and socialist perspective. Issues of 
gender dominate the tales. For example, the restricted choices and 
limited economic independence of the female characters, all of 
whom are expected to play out the roles defined for them by 
the male characters; the centrality of female empowerment and 
self-reliance; the necessity of resisting and escaping tradition 
through creative personal choice; and, above all, a recognition that 
changes in a patriarchal society will come from women, not from 
men, as men do not have motives to give up their positions of 
power. But these issues of gender are not easily disentangled 
112 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 115 ===
Critical perspectives Contemporary approaches 
from issues of class for Carter, and class struggle is a key tenet of 
Marxism. As a materialist, Carter grounds her fantasy in carefully 
selected realistic detail; as a storyteller, Carter explores how fantasy 
frees the imagination from the constraint of realism. A Marxist 
approach takes into account Carter’s background as a student of 
medieval literature as an important influence on her style (see 
Literary background: Medieval influences). 
For Carter, the active resolution of the personal and social 
contradictions that her characters cannot avoid is the most 
important aspect of the tales: her characters act to make changes 
happen in their lives; they are not passive victims of circumstance. 
In this respect they can be viewed as icons of the ‘call to action’ 
of the 1970s feminist and socialist milieu. A Marxist approach to 
The Bloody Chamber as ‘a complicated turning inside out of old 
forms’ may be more relevant than some feminist critics might admit. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
The Marxist 
academic Terry 
Eagleton asserts 
in Marxism and 
Literary Criticism 
(1976) that his aim 
is 'to explain the 
literary work more 
fully ... giving 
sensitive attention 
to its forms, styles 
and meanings ... 
as a product of a 
particular history'. 
The Bloody Chamber 113 

=== PDF PAGE 116 ===
Part Five 
Background 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Sarah Gamble's 
Angela Carter: A 
Literary Life (2005) 
examines Carter's 
life and work in 
its literary and 
historical context. 
Gamble's main 
problem, that 'most 
of the facts of 
Carter's life that 
have entered the 
public domain were 
put there by Carter 
herself', reveals how 
difficult it can be to 
separate fact and 
fiction in a writer's 
life. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
As early as 1967, 
in her second novel, 
The Magic Toyshop, 
it is possible to see 
Carter's fascination 
with fairy tales. 
Angela Carter’s life and works 
Angela Olive Stalker, born in Eastbourne, Sussex, on 7 May 1940 
to Olive (nee Farthing) and Hugh Stalker, took the surname Carter 
from her first husband and retained it as her professional identity 
after her divorce. Her father was Scottish, a journalist and veteran 
of the First World War; her mother was brought up in a mining 
community in Yorkshire. Angela was evacuated during the Second 
World War to Wath-upon-Dearne, a village in the South Yorkshire 
mining area, and lived with her maternal grandmother for the 
first five years of her life. The family influence of her maternal 
grandfather, dead some time before Angela was born, can be traced 
in her attitudes. He was a socialist, a member of the Independent 
Labour Party, a trade unionist and deeply committed to self- 
education and self-improvement. Her mother was a grammar 
school girl and did not share her grandfather’s outlook, and 
Angela Carter would later describe her relationship with her 
mother as difficult and more complex than her relationship 
with her father. 
Angela returned to Balham, south London, after the end of the 
Second World War. Suffering from anorexia and issues of self¬ 
esteem, she failed to realise the early signs of academic potential she 
demonstrated as a young girl, and when she was eighteen her father 
secured her an apprenticeship position as a junior newspaper 
reporter on the Croydon Advertiser. In 1960 she married Paul 
Carter and moved with him to Bristol. Unable to get work as a 
journalist, she enrolled as a mature student at Bristol University. 
She chose to study medieval literature and began her career as a 
writer while still an undergraduate. Her first novel, Shadow Dance, 
was published in 1966, the year after she graduated. 
Within a few years, Angela Carter was becoming a successful 
author, with several novels published, and she was beginning 
to establish a reputation for herself as an award-winning writer. 
The Magic Toyshop (1967) won her the John Llewellyn Rhys Prize. 
114 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 117 ===
Background Angela Carter’s life and works 
Two novels followed which, along with Shadow Dance, are usually 
referred to as her Bristol trilogy: Several Perceptions (1968, which 
won the Somerset Maugham Award in 1969) and Love (1971). 
These novels are united by being set in the 1960s Bristol ‘scene’ and 
by the features of the Gothic genre they subvert, particularly the 
idea of women as victims of men. Carter disliked these novels being 
categorised as ‘Gothic’, as she believed she was writing in a realistic 
manner about the Bristol she knew. In 1969 she separated from her 
husband and left Europe, via America, for Japan. When she 
returned to England in 1972, she had no publisher and had been 
absent from the literary scene for three years. The momentum of 
her early career seemed to be faltering. In the five years before 
The Bloody Chamber appeared she had two novels published - 
The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman (1972) and The 
Passion of New Eve (1977) - together with a collection of short 
stories, Fireworks: Nine Profane Pieces (1974). 
The publication of The Bloody Chamber in 1979, her second 
volume of short stories (shortly preceded by her equally 
controversial non-fiction work The Sadeian Woman), was a factor 
in the restoration of her career. The controversy surrounding the 
work, establishing her as an ‘extreme’ writer, not only attracted 
the feminist critics and media reviewers, but brought her to the 
attention of a wider general readership. Carter would go on to write 
two other volumes of short stories, one of which, American Ghosts 
and Old World Wonders (1993), was published after her death. In 
1995 all Carter’s short stories, including her four collections, were 
gathered together into one volume with an introduction by Salman 
Rushdie: Burning Your Boats: Collected Short Stories (see Further 
reading for a list of Carter’s works, including poetry, drama and her 
non-fiction writing). 
By the mid 1980s, Angela Carter was a well-established author and 
journalist, an acknowledged presence in radio drama, and beginning 
to make her mark in the film industry with the adaptation of her 
written work for the cinema and television. She had a new family - a 
second husband, Mark Pearce; and a son, Alexander (born in 1983) 
- and she was developing her role as a teacher in various higher 
education establishments in the UK, America and Australia. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Carter draws upon 
her experience of 
Japanese culture 
in several of the 
stories in Fireworks, 
such as 'A Souvenir 
of Japan' and 'Flesh 
and the Mirror' 
(1974). 
CONTEXT 
For two years from 
1976 Carter taught 
creative writing 
at Sheffield 
University; posts in 
America (Brown 
University, Rhode 
Island, 1980-1) 
and Australia 
(University of 
Adelaide, 1984) 
followed. From 
1984 to 1987 she 
taught at the 
University of East 
Anglia. 
The Bloody Chamber 115 

=== PDF PAGE 118 ===
Angela Carter’s life and works Background 
CONTEXT 
Nights at the 
Circus won the 
1984 James Tait 
Black Memorial 
Prize for Fiction. 
\_/ 
CONTEXT 
'Then arose new 
architects who after 
the manner of their 
barbarous nations 
erected buildings in 
that style which we 
call Gothic': so said 
the Florentine artist 
Giorgio Vasari 
(1511-74), regarded 
as the first art 
historian. Gothic 
architecture 
features high 
vaulted ceilings, 
pointed arches and 
buttressed walls. 
Most examples in 
Britain are large 
church buildings 
such as the 
cathedrals of 
Salisbury, Exeter, 
Canterbury and 
Winchester. 
V_ 
In 1984 one of her most acclaimed novels, Nights at the Circus, 
was published, and the film The Company of Wolves, directed by 
Neil Jordan, was released. Nights at the Circus is a magic realism 
extravaganza, starring a trapeze artist called Fewers, who was 
hatched from an egg and grew real wings at puberty. Carter’s last 
novel, Wise Children, a feast of carnival magic and comic realism, 
was published only a few months before her death from lung cancer 
on 16 February 1992. It is true that an untimely death can spark 
renewed interest in an artist or writer. This was certainly the case 
with Angela Carter but, unusually, that burgeoning posthumous 
interest has not faltered, nor has her reputation as ‘a bit extreme’ 
(as described by Aidan Day in Angela Carter: The Rational Glass, 
1998, p. 1) been affected by the years that have passed since her 
death. It is ironic but perhaps not unsurprising that, as a woman 
and a writer who spent her life ‘talking back’ to authority, her work 
was only truly embraced by the literary critics and academics when 
she was no longer around to answer them. 
Literary background 
The Gothic tradition 
The term Gothic originally described a particular style of art in 
medieval Europe. Typically surviving in its most obvious form in 
architecture, Gothic style dominated much of the culture at that 
time. The Goths were a pagan tribe in northern Germany who 
took control of parts of the Roman Empire as it collapsed. The 
Gothic style is associated with crude, grotesque and exaggerated 
representation and, to some extent, is a fusion of early Christian 
and pagan symbolism. Whereas the Christian ideal would seek to 
inspire a sense of a divine presence through awe and mystery, the 
pagan influence represents the divine as concrete aspects of nature. 
The style came to be seen as a primitive attempt to incorporate the 
power of the wilderness within a civilising structure, and was 
viewed, during the Renaissance and the age of Enlightenment, 
as the sign of a superstitious and brutal epoch. (The medieval 
influence on Carter is discussed in more detail below: see 
Medieval influences.) 
116 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 119 ===
Background Literary background 
Works of literature that have been defined or labelled as Gothic 
share certain features: notably a preoccupation with extremes 
of sensation, perception and location; and an emphasis on the 
supernatural. These characteristics have been recycled in more or 
less conscious fashion by the writers included in or flirting with this 
genre over the last three hundred years or so. The Gothic sensibility 
in literature was a reactionary attempt to warn, in a sensational and 
entertaining way, about the social and individual consequences 
of adopting unconventional ideas or going against the accepted 
beliefs of the time. The thrills are provided by the transgressive 
sense of going beyond the boundaries of acceptable behaviour. 
The challenge to the normative conduct of society and individuals 
is usually accompanied by dire consequences for the protagonist. 
But the genre is not limited to questions of moral or ethical 
imprudence. 
Carter positively revels in extreme sensations, perceptions and 
locations. The gruesome display of dead wives in ‘The Bloody 
Chamber’, the disorientation of the senses in ‘The Erl-King’, and 
the descriptions of wilderness and the palazzo (p. 63) in ‘The Tiger’s 
Bride’, for example, demonstrate how Carter exaggerates the Gothic 
content of fairy tales. Only ‘The Bloody Chamber’ and ‘Puss-in- 
Boocs’ do not explicitly take the supernatural as the central 
characteristic of the tale. ‘Puss-in-Boots’ seems less obviously 
Gothic in its lecherous comedy, but Carter certainly delights in 
the bawdy and murderous adultery her anarchic heroes undertake. 
The narrator in ‘The Bloody Chamber’ experiences the thrills and 
near-fatal consequences of transgression. In The Bloody Chamber 
Carter is both sensational and entertaining while promoting 
unconventional ideas that challenged the accepted beliefs of 
her time. The collection proposes some radical alternatives to 
the traditional fairy tale or Gothic ‘consequences’ of personal 
action. 
Early Gothic 
It is possible to trace a cultural connection between medieval 
mystery plays, one of the means by which Christian doctrines were 
communicated to an illiterate society, and later works of drama that 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
For a short essay 
on Gothic fiction, 
see The Oxford 
Companion to 
English Literature 
(edited by Margaret 
Drabble, revised 
sixth edition, 2006). 
CONTEXT 
Medieval drama 
developed mainly 
from the teachings 
of the Christian 
Church and took 
various forms: 
miracle plays, 
mystery plays and 
morality plays. 
Mystery plays are 
based on biblical 
stories and were 
known to be 
performed in 
Britain, France, 
Spain, Denmark 
and Russia. Little 
textual evidence 
survives of the 
miracle plays, 
which depict the 
lives of the saints, 
but mystery plays 
are still performed 
in York and 
Chester. 
_ 
The Bloody Chamber 117 

=== PDF PAGE 120 ===
Literary background Background 
The Gothic tradition: Early Gothic continued 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In Ian McEwan's 
Atonement (2001) 
the introductory 
epigraph is taken 
from Jane Austen's 
Northanger Abbey, 
in which a young 
woman, an avid 
reader of Gothic 
fiction, imagines 
that her host in an 
English country 
house is a villain. In 
Austen's novel these 
mistakes are comical 
and have no serious 
outcome; in 
Atonement one 
character's 
imagination and 
fantasies have tragic 
effects for other 
characters. 
CONTEXT 
Frankenstein was 
written by Mary 
Shelley in response 
to a literary 
challenge from 
Lord Byron in 
1816. The same 
competition to 
produce a horrific 
tale also caused 
John Polidori, 
Byron's personal 
physician, to write 
'The Vampyre', the 
first tale of its kind 
to be published in 
the English 
language (in 
instalments in 
the New Monthly 
Magazine in 1819). 
employ allegorical or supernatural devices. Shakespeare’s plays 
Macbeth (1606) and Hamlet (1601) are notable precursors of the 
Gothic sensibility, with their ghostly yet unreliable exhortations 
to action and their preoccupation with insanity. Feigned madness, 
the passions of revenge and elaborate crimes of murder are features 
of John Webster’s revenge tragedy The White Devil (1612), also 
regarded as a text that foreshadowed the Gothic literature of the 
eighteenth century. 
Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Gothic 
Horace Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto (1764), Ann Radcliffe’s 
The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794) and Matthew G. Lewis’s The 
Monk (1796) are considered to be the ‘classic’ Gothic tales that 
established the conventions of the genre in English literature. The 
characters tend to be rather two-dimensional, suffering excesses of 
emotional stress through fear and terror, mostly related to 
supernatural phenomena, and the events take place in unfamiliar 
locations distanced in time from the present moment. 
Jane Austen’s Northanger Abbey (begun in 1798 and published 
posthumously in 1818) shifted the focus of genre from the perceived 
hysteria of the victim as caused by external intimidation to the 
psychological interior world of her characters. Some commentators 
see this as a response to the waning credibility of the Gothic 
convention, though the popularity of horrific and sensational stories 
seems undiminished in the burgeoning mass culture. Mary Shelley’s 
Trankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus, which appeared in 1818, 
relies so little on the traditionally identified elements of Gothic 
fiction that it almost appears to be outside the genre altogether. 
However, it is an enquiry into the nature of resurrection, and all 
the essential questions of life and death are posed by the existence 
endured by Frankenstein’s creature. As such, the elements of 
supernatural power, fearful locations and terrible madness are 
presented to support Shelley’s monstrous investigation of what 
it is to be human. Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights (originally 
published under the gender-disguising name Ellis Bell in 1847), with 
its intricate narrative structure and desolate setting, also features a 
mysterious and violent man who destroys a strong woman, amid 
ghosts, passions and revenge. 
118 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 121 ===
Background Literary background 
Later Gothic 
The modernity of the later Victorian Gothic novels explores 
the darker aspects of the human psyche in the familiar setting 
of the modern world. This is a conscious attempt to question, 
by bringing the terrors of the past into conflict with the assumed 
certainties of the present, the direction of social progress. Robert 
Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde 
(1886) and Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890) use 
the topical notion of multiple personality to explore the dual 
nature of humanity as man-beast, god-devil, angel-demon. Angela 
Carter, in The Bloody Chamber, reworks this typical theme of the 
Gothic genre, not only in the magical transformations throughout 
the collection, but also in the way these transformations explore 
the dual nature of humanity as both human and animal. As in 
H. G. Wells’s The Island of Doctor Moreau (1896), science and 
religion are called into question as the authors dwell on the 
potential horrors and glories within the individual. Bram Stoker’s 
Dracula (1897) imports European folklore in a highly theatrical, 
eroticised and melodramatic combination of Gothic elements that 
portrays civilisation threatened by an ancient menace. In this way 
these novels reflect the powerful revolutionary changes taking 
place in the nineteenth century that inspired and still influence 
our understanding of personal identity and social responsibility. 
In the twentieth century the influence of modernism and the 
all too real horrors of human history saw the genre in decline. 
Its influence has fragmented into particular and identifiable 
commercial markets such as science fiction and horror, though it 
has always remained a certain presence in the mainstream. Critics 
have applied the term Southern Gothic to the works of Tennessee 
Williams (1911-83) and other American writers, in a bid to place 
them as a recognisable subgenre derived from European literature. 
Aspects of the Gothic were used by writers such as Daphne du 
Maurier (1907-89) and Mervyn Peake (1911-68); and other 
writers, such as Anne Rice (b.l 941) and the master of modern 
horror, Stephen King (b.l947), incorporate elements of the Gothic 
genre in their work as they continue to explore the dark horrors of 
the human imagination. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In Two Women of 
London: The 
Strange Case of Ms 
Jekyll and Mrs Hyde 
(1989) Emma 
Tennant takes 
Robert Louis 
Stevenson's classic 
exploration of the 
divided self and 
gives it a 
feminist slant. 
The Bloody Chamber 119 

=== PDF PAGE 122 ===
Literary background Background 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
Everyman 
(c. 1509-19) is 
the best-known 
example of a 
morality play. The 
character Everyman 
is warned he must 
prepare to meet 
Death, and learns 
he cannot rely on 
false friends, family 
or wealth. His 
virtues, personified 
as characters - 
Strength, Beauty, 
Discretion, Five 
Wits, Knowledge - 
help Everyman, but 
when he finally 
meets Death, only 
Good Deeds 
remains with him. 
Such plays are 
simple dramatic 
allegories of the 
moral struggle that 
Christianity suggests 
every individual has 
in common. 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
The influence of 
morality plays 
can be found in 
Elizabethan drama, 
particularly 
Christopher 
Marlowe's darkly 
Gothic play The 
Tragical History 
of Doctor Faustus 
(c. 1594; first 
published in 1604), 
in which the 
protagonist sells his 
soul to the devil. 
Medieval influences 
Angela Carter’s wide interests in literature and philosophy are 
represented in the depth and range of intertextual reference 
incorporated in her stories. She is a self-consciously and defiantly 
literary writer. Her interests in medieval literature are present in 
The Bloody Chamber in two important and definitive ways. 
Medieval creators of text were conscious that they were writing 
for an audience that would hear their tales rather than read them. 
The element of the human voice in the narrative is something 
Carter consciously strives to achieve. She is always present as the 
storyteller, even when the narrative voice is nominally given to a 
character within the story. Visual imagery before the era of literacy 
had a different social significance; for four hundred years or so, 
society has been dominated by the medium of print. Carter is a 
highly visual writer, and her use of symbol, metaphor and allegory 
is a return to that preliterate age in a literary form. 
Allegory is a significant narrative device in medieval literature and 
works in a variety of ways to convey meaning to the reader on 
different levels. Medieval texts were written to be read aloud to 
non-readers, and allegory is another way of showing to the reader 
the meanings within the story. Just as Everyman stands as a 
character in a drama in medieval morality plays, and as a device 
providing a point of reference and identification for every person 
in the audience, so too are Carter’s characters more than merely 
themselves to the reader, particularly the female reader. The reader 
is shown the moral journey of these characters and invited to 
identify with their personal dilemmas. 
Postmodern and Mannerist influences 
The influence of the developing postmodernist perspective is also 
present in Carter’s writing (see also Contemporary approaches), 
but it can be seen as a kind of formalised attraction to the idea of 
‘systems of significance’ as embodied in the work of early 
twentieth-century theorists such as Ferdinand de Saussure 
(1857-1913) and Charles Sanders Peirce (1839-1914) and their 
120 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 123 ===
Background Historical background 
European followers Roland Barthes (1915-80) and Jean Baudrillard 
(1929-2007), who elaborated the theory of semiotics. But Carter 
distanced herself from the reactionary relativism of postmodernism 
which conflicted with her materialist perspective. She considered 
the postmodern perspective to be self-referential and introverted, 
an academic exercise that involved merely writing ‘books about 
books’ without any connection to the world beyond literature; 
she compared this approach to the sixteenth-century Mannerist 
movement in art. This comparison was not meant as a compliment, 
but to show how she understood postmodernism to be the opposite 
of a progressive development in theory. 
But there are also connections between Carter’s work and the idea 
of Mannerism as an artistic perspective, particularly its rejection of 
notions of symmetry and harmonious equilibrium. Mannerist 
painters are typically regarded as having depicted emotional 
intensity through the use of distorted perspectives, intricate 
composition and vivid imagery. They also pursued ambiguity in a 
way that is also present in Carter’s work. Carter was careful in her 
construction of her stories and concerned that her readers found her 
meaning, but was also quite relaxed about being read in different 
ways, and at different levels of meaning, by different readers: her 
stories acknowledge and allow that possibility. 
Historical background 
The post-war period in which Angela Carter grew up was 
dominated by the cold war between the former allies against 
fascism. The USSR emerged from the Second World War as a major 
international power and Eastern Europe disappeared behind what 
Winston Churchill defined in 1946 as the ‘Iron Curtain’. Britain was 
no longer able to sustain its former imperial position and America, 
as the dominant capitalist power in the West, began to have greater 
influence on British culture. 
Post-war Britain was dominated by the ‘make do and mend’ 
approach. Rationing for some items did not stop until the mid 1950s 
and Britain was, as it had been during the war, heavily dependent 
on American aid. The introduction of the welfare state in 1945, 
CONTEXT 
Saussure, Peirce 
and Charles W. 
Morris (1901-79) 
are usually 
credited with the 
development, from 
nineteenth-century 
linguistic theory, of 
the scientific study 
of signs and 
symbols known as 
semiotics. Saussure 
suggested that 
'semiology', 
originally used in 
the seventeenth 
century in the 
medical 
profession's 
interpretation 
of signs, was 
necessary to study 
'the role of signs as 
part of social life' 
(Course in General 
Linguistics, 1983 
edition, p. 15). 
CHECK 
THE BOOK 
In his 1957 
collection of essays, 
Mythologies, 
Barthes looks at the 
powerful nature of 
ancient stories and 
the way in which 
they have come to 
affect our values 
and beliefs. 
The Bloody Chamber 121 

=== PDF PAGE 124 ===
Historical background Background 
CONTEXT 
William Beveridge 
(1879-1963) was a 
Liberal economist 
commissioned by 
the British 
government to 
report on the ways 
Britain could be 
rebuilt after the 
Second World War. 
He recommended 
that the 
government 
should take steps 
to overcome the 
five 'Giant Evils' 
facing society - 
'Want, Disease, 
Ignorance, Squalor 
and Idleness' - and 
in 1945 the Labour 
government 
announced the 
introduction of the 
welfare state as 
suggested in his 
1942 Beveridge 
Report. 
v_/ 
©CHECK 
THE NET 
Search the Internet 
for more 
information about 
the cold war and 
other major 
historical and 
political incidents of 
the 1970s and 1980s. 
with free health care and education for all, was a significant social 
reform that shaped British life in the latter part of the twentieth 
century. This was followed in 1948 by the radical and innovative 
establishment of a National Health Service with medical treatment 
available to all. 
The austerity of the immediate post-war period in Britain gave 
way to Harold Wilson’s era of the ‘white heat of technology’ that 
optimistically looked forward to a future where advances in 
science would solve many of humanity’s material problems. The 
introduction of the oral contraceptive pill in 1960 was to have a 
profound impact on the social relations between men and women. 
The so-called ‘baby boom’ generation, born in the aftermath of 
the war, came of age during the 1960s and defined that decade as 
one of protest against the mistakes of previous generations. The 
assassination of the American president John F. Kennedy on 
22 November 1963 is often viewed as a turning point in the cold 
war, while the America war in Vietnam became the focus of 
unprecedented levels of international protest. Old values and 
traditional perspectives were challenged as the televisual age 
shrank the world to fit into a smaller screen. 
The 1970s brought political scandals in America; economic upheaval 
with the price of oil rapidly rising; increasing unemployment and 
industrial strikes in Britain; challenges to ‘male chauvinism’ by the 
feminist movement; and the turn towards monetarism in Britain 
replacing the mixed-economy approach that attempted to harness 
market forces for public benefit. 
Margaret Thatcher’s policy of privatisation in the 1980s was 
opposed by the trade union movement, and legislation was 
introduced to limit trade union power for the benefit of free 
market entrepreneurs. Britain went to war against the Argentinian 
occupation of the Falkland Islands in 1982, and after the war the 
Tories were returned to power with a huge majority. The political 
confrontations that characterised the mid 1980s, most of all the 
miners’ strike of 1984, redefined British society. Thatcher’s 
‘Victorian values’ predominated and her view that ‘There is no such 
122 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 125 ===
Background Historical background 
thing as society. There are individual men and women and there 
are families’, given in a interview with Woman's Own magazine 
(31 October 1987), summed up that change in outlook completely. 
The end of the cold war era was in sight when Mikhail Gorbachev, 
president of the USSR, announced the policies of glasnost and 
perestroika as a rejection of Stalinist dictatorship in 1985. Within six 
years the USSR had ceased to exist and the cold war was officially 
over. South Africa ended years of apartheid rule and released 
Nelson Mandela after twenty-seven years in prison. With the 
demolition of the Berlin Wall starting in 1989, the ‘Iron Curtain’ in 
Eastern Europe was no more. But in China in the same year, student 
protests for reform were crushed in Tiananmen Square. In the 1990s 
satellite communications made the Internet available to the public, 
creating the possibility of instant personal interaction between 
individuals around the world. America, as the dominant superpower 
in the world, took its main European ally, Britain, into the first war 
in the Gulf in 1991. 
Carter was very much aware of herself as a late twentieth-century 
woman. As she once stated: ‘The sense of limitless freedom that I, as 
a woman, sometimes feel is that of a new kind of being. Because I 
simply could not have existed, as I am, in any other preceding time 
or place. I am the pure product of an advanced, industrialised, post¬ 
imperialist country in decline’ (‘Notes from the Front Line’, in On 
Gender and Writing, edited by Michelene Wandor, 1983, p. 73). 
CHECK 
THE FILM 
The television 
drama series Boys 
from the Blackstuff 
was first broadcast 
in 1982. Written 
by Liverpool 
playwright Alan 
Bleasdale (b. 1946), 
the series is 
regarded as a 
definitive dramatic 
response to the 
Thatcher era, comic 
and tragic in its 
sweeping depiction 
of individuals whose 
lives are being 
changed by 
governmental 
policies of 
privatisation and 
monetarism. 
The Bloody Chamber 123 

=== PDF PAGE 126 ===
Chronology Background 
World events 
1939 Second World War 
begins 
1940 British 
Expeditionary Force 
rescued from Dunkirk 
beaches by naval and 
civilian fleet; assassination 
of Leon Trotsky 
1944 D-Day landings; 
Education Act raises 
school leaving age to 
fifteen 
1945 End of Second World 
War; welfare state in 
Britain introduced 
1946 Cold war begins 
1947 India gains 
independence from Britain 
1948 Establishment of 
National Health Service 
1951 Festival of Britain; 
Winston Churchill resigns 
as prime minister 
1953 Coronation of 
Queen Elizabeth II 
Angela Carter’s life 
1940 Born 7 May in 
Eastbourne; evacuated to 
South Yorkshire 
1945 Family moves to 
Balham, south London 
1951 Passes eleven plus 
exam; attends ‘direct grant’ 
school 
Literary events 
1939 James Joyce, 
Finnegans Wake 
1940 Graham Greene, 
The Power and the Glory, 
Edmund Wilson, To the 
Finland Station 
1941 Bertolt Brecht, 
Mother Courage and Her 
Children 
1945 George Orwell, 
Animal Farm-, Tennessee 
Williams’s The Glass 
Menagerie opens on 
Broadway 
1946 Mervyn Peake, 
Titus Groan 
1947 J. B. Priestley, 
An Inspector Calls 
1948 T. S. Eliot awarded 
Nobel Prize 
1949 Simone de Beauvoir, 
The Second Sex 
1951 J. D. Salinger, 
The Catcher in the Rye 
1954 Kingsley Amis, 
Lucky Jim-, William 
Golding, Lord of the 
Flies 
124 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 127 ===
Background Chronology 
World events 
1956 Hungarian 
revolution crushed by 
Soviet military intervention 
1958 Empire Day renamed 
Commonwealth Day; 
Campaign for Nuclear 
Disarmament (CND) 
formed 
1959 Revolution in Cuba 
brings Fidel Castro to 
power 
1961 Berlin Wall built 
1962 Cuban missile crisis 
1963 President John F. 
Kennedy assassinated 
1965 Death of Winston 
Churchill; abolition of 
death penalty; US openly 
enters Vietnam War 
Angela Carter’s life 
1957 Anorexia affects 
academic performance 
1958 Works as reporter for 
Croydon Advertiser 
1960 Marries Paul Carter 
1962 Studies English at 
Bristol University 
1965 Gains BA in English 
1966 Begins reviews for 
New Society and the 
Guardian; first novel, 
Shadow Dance, published 
Literary events 
1955 Samuel Beckett, 
Waiting for Godot (English 
translation); Vladimir 
Nabokov, Lolita 
1957 Jack Kerouac, 
On the Road 
1958 Harold Pinter, 
The Birthday Party 
1960 Penguin Books 
acquitted in obscenity 
trial for publication of 
D. H. Lawrence’s Lady 
Chatterley’s Lover 
1961 Joseph Heller, 
Catch-22 
1962 Anthony Burgess, 
A Clockwork Orange 
1963 Betty Friedan, 
The Feminine Mystique 
1964 A. S. Byatt, Shadow 
of a Sun; Philip Larkin, 
The Whitsun Weddings 
1966 Jean Rhys, Wide 
Sargasso Sea; Susan Sontag, 
Against Interpretation 
The Bloody Chamber 125 

=== PDF PAGE 128 ===
Chronology Background 
World events 
1967 Decriminalisation of 
homosexuality in Britain; 
the Beatles, Sergeant 
Pepper’s Lonely Hearts 
Club Band 
1968 Student protests 
in Paris; Martin Luther 
King assassinated; 
Czechoslovakia invaded 
by Soviet troops to crush 
liberal reforms of 
Alexander Dubcek 
1969 British troops sent 
into Ireland; Neil 
Armstrong becomes first 
man on moon 
1971 Women’s Liberation 
march in London 
1972 Watergate scandal; 
Bloody Sunday shootings 
in Northern Ireland 
1973 Britain joins 
European Economic 
Community 
Angela Carter’s life 
1967 The Magic Toyshop 
published and wins John 
Llewellyn Rhys Prize 
1968 Several Perceptions 
1969 Heroes and Villains', 
wins Somerset Maugham 
Award for Several 
Perceptions; separates from 
husband and travels to 
Japan; death of mother 
1971 Love 
1972 Returns to England; 
divorces Paul Carter; The 
Infernal Desire Machines 
of Doctor Hoffman 
Literary events 
1967 Gabriel Garcia 
Marquez, One Hundred 
Years of Solitude 
(translated into English 
1970); Peter Nichols, 
A Day in the Death of 
Joe Egg 
1968 Gore Vidal, Myra 
Breckenridge 
1969 Maya Angelou, 
I Know Why the Caged 
Bird Sings; John Fowles, 
The French Lieutenant’s 
Woman; Kurt Vonnegut, 
Slaughterhouse-Five 
1970 Germaine Greer, 
The Female Eunuch; Kate 
Millett, Sexual Politics; 
Dario Fo, Accidental 
Death of an Anarchist 
(translated into English 
1979) 
1971 Anne Sexton, 
Transformations 
1973 Martin Amis, The 
Rachel Papers; Erica Jong, 
Fear of Flying 
126 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 129 ===
Background Chronology 
World events 
1975 End of Vietnam War: 
American withdrawal is 
major defeat for US 
1976 The Sex Pistols 
release the single ‘Anarchy 
in the UK’ 
1979 Tories win general 
election; Margaret 
Thatcher becomes prime 
minister 
1980 John Lennon shot 
Angela Carter’s life 
1974 Fireworks: Nine 
Profane Pieces 
1976-8 Arts Council 
Fellow at Sheffield 
University 
1977 The Passion of New 
Eve; The Fairy Tales of 
Charles Perrault 
(translator); marries second 
husband, Mark Pearce; 
member of Virago Press 
advisory board 
1979 The Sadeian Woman; 
The Bloody Chamber 
published and wins 
Cheltenham Festival of 
Literature Award; Martin 
Leman’s Comic and 
Curious Cats 
1980 The Music People 
1980-1 Visiting professor 
of creative writing at 
Brown University, Rhode 
Island 
Literary events 
1973-5 Alexander 
Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag 
Archipelago 
1974 Shere Hite, Sexual 
Honesty: By Women for 
Women 
1975 Ruth Prawer 
Jhabvala, Heat and Dust 
1976 Alex Haley, Roots 
1978 Ian McEwan, 
The Cement Garden; Iris 
Murdoch, The Sea, the Sea; 
Emma Tennant, The Bad 
Sister 
1979 Peter Shaffer, 
Amadeus 
1980 Umberto Eco, 
The Name of the Rose 
The Bloody Chamber 127 

=== PDF PAGE 130 ===
Chronology Background 
World events 
1981 Ronald Reagan 
becomes US president; 
mass protests at Greenham 
Common against nuclear 
weapons; first reported 
case of Aids 
1982 Falklands War 
1984 Miners’ strike; IRA 
bomb at Conservative 
Party Conference; Indira 
Gandhi, Indian prime 
minister, assassinated 
1985 Glasnost and 
perestroika begin in USSR 
Angela Carter’s life 
1982 Moonshadow; 
Nothing Sacred: Selected 
Writings-, Sleeping Beauty 
and Other Favourite Fairy 
Tales (editor and 
translator) 
1983 Son, Alexander 
Pearce, born 
1984 Writer in residence 
at University of Adelaide, 
South Australia; Nights at 
the Circus published and 
wins James Tait Black 
Memorial Award for 
Fiction; film of The 
Company of Wolves 
released 
1984-7 Part-time teacher 
at University of East 
Anglia 
1985 Black Venus 
anthology; teaches in 
Austin, Texas 
Literary events 
1981 Anita Brookner, 
A Start in Life-, Liz 
Lochhead, The Grimm 
Sisters; Salman Rushdie, 
Midnight’s Children 
1982 Isabel Allende, 
The House of the Spirits 
(published in English 1985) 
1983 J. M. Coetzee, 
The Life and Times of 
Michael K; Graham Swift, 
Waterland; Fay Weldon, 
The Life and Loves of a 
She-Devil 
1984 Pat Barker, Blow 
Your House Down; Milan 
Kundera, The Unbearable 
Lightness of Being 
1985 Margaret Atwood, 
The Handmaid’s Tale; 
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, 
Love in the Time of 
Cholera (translated into 
English 1988); Jeanette 
Winterson, Oranges Are 
Not the Only Fruit 
128 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 131 ===
Background Chronology 
World events 
1989 Berlin Wall 
dismantled; Tiananmen 
Square protests and killings 
in China 
1990 Poll tax 
demonstrations; Margaret 
Thatcher resigns; Nelson 
Mandela released from 
prison; international stock 
market crash known as 
Black Monday 
1991 Collapse of Soviet 
Union; Internet 
established; First Gulf War 
1994 Nelson Mandela 
becomes president of 
South Africa 
Angela Carter’s life 
1986 Teaches in Iowa City, 
Iowa 
1987 Television film of 
The Magic Toyshop 
1988 Teaches in Albany, 
New York State; father dies 
1990 The Virago Book of 
Fairy Tales (editor) 
1991 Wise Children 
1992 Dies 16 February of 
lung cancer; The Second 
Virago Book of Fairy Tales 
(editor) 
1993 American Ghosts and 
Old World Wonders 
published posthumously 
1995 Burning Your Boats: 
Collected Short Stories 
published posthumously 
Literary events 
1987 Toni Morrison, 
Beloved 
1988 Salman Rushdie, The 
Satanic Verses; Ayatollah 
Khomeini declares fatawa 
on Rushdie 
1989 Kazuo Isiguro, The 
Remains of the Day; Emma 
Tennant, Two Women of 
London: The Strange Case 
of Ms Jekyll and Mrs Hyde 
1990 Derek Walcott, 
Omeros 
1991 BenOkri, 
The Famished Road 
1992 David Mamet, 
Oleanna; Michael 
Ondaatje, The English 
Patient 
1993 Vikram Seth, 
A Suitable Boy 
1994 A. S. Byatt, 
The Djinn in the 
Nightingale’s Eye 
1995 Salman Rushdie, 
The Moor’s Last Sigh 
The Bloody Chamber 129 

=== PDF PAGE 132 ===
Further reading 
Other works by Angela Carter 
Novels 
Shadow Dance (1966) 
The Magic Toyshop (1967) 
Several Perceptions (1968) 
Heroes and Villains (1969) 
Love (1971) 
The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman (1972) 
The Passion of New Eve (1977) 
Nights at the Circus (1984) 
Wise Children (1991) 
Short stories 
Fireworks: Nine Profane Pieces (1974) 
The Bloody Chamber (1979) 
Black Venus (1985) 
American Ghosts and Old World Wonders (1993) 
Burning Your Boats: Collected Short Stories (1995) 
Poetry 
Five Quiet Shouters (1966) 
Unicorn (1966) 
130 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 133 ===
Further reading 
Drama 
Come Unto These Yellow Sands: Four Radio Plays (1985) 
The Curious Room: Collected Dramatic Works (1996) 
The Holy Family Album (1991) 
Children’s books 
The Donkey Prince (1970) 
Miss Z, the Dark Young Lady (1970) 
Martin Leman’s Comic and Curious Cats (1979) 
The Music People (1980) 
Moonshadow (1982) 
Sea-Cat and Dragon King (2000) 
Non-fiction 
The Sadeian Woman and the Ideology of Pornography (1979; originally published 
as The Sadeian Woman: An Exercise in Cultural History) 
Nothing Sacred: Selected Writings (1982) 
Expletives Deleted: Selected Writings (1992) 
Shaking a Leg: Collected Journalism and Writings (1997) 
Angela Carter as translator/editor 
The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault (1977) 
Sleeping Beauty and Other Favourite Fairy Tales (1982) 
Wayward Girls and Wicked Women: An Anthology of Subversive Stories (1986) 
The Bloody Chamber 131 

=== PDF PAGE 134 ===
Further reading 
Angela Carter as translator/editor continued 
The Virago Book of Fairy Tales (1990) 
The Second Virago Book of Fairy Tales (1992) 
Angela Carter’s Book of Fairy Tales (2005) 
Wider reading 
Gothic texts 
Jane Austen, North anger Abbey, 1818 
Emily Bronte, VJutbering Heights, 1847 
Geoffrey Chaucer, ‘The Pardoner’s Tale’, in The Canterbury Tales, c. 1387 
Charles Dickens, Great Expectations, 1860-1 
Daphne du Maurier, Rebecca, 1938 
William Faulkner, Sanctuary, 1931 
Joseph Sheridan le Fanu, ‘Carmilla’, 1872 
Matthew G. Lewis, The Monk, 1796 
Christopher Marlowe, The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus, 1604 
John Milton, Paradide Lost, 1667 
Toni Morrison, Beloved, 1987 
Mervyn Peake, Titus Groan, 1946 
Edgar Allan Poe, ‘The Fall of the House of Usher’, 1839 
Edgar Allan Poe, ‘The Raven’, 1845 
Ann Radcliffe, The Mysteries of Udolpho, 1794 
132 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 135 ===
Further reading 
William Shakespeare, Macbeth, 1606 
Mary Shelley, Frankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus, 1818 
Robert Louis Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, 1886 
Bram Stoker, Dracula, 1897 
Graham Swift, Waterland, 1983 
Horace Walpole, The Castle of Otranto, 1764 
John Webster, The White Devil, 1612 
H. G. Wells, The Island of Doctor Moreau, 1896 
Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890 
Selected female revisionist texts 
Margaret Atwood, The Penelopiad, 2005 
Carol Ann Duffy, The World’s Wife, 1999 
Adele Geras, Watching the Roses, 1991 
Liz Lochhead, The Grimm Sisters, 1981 
Anne Sexton, Transformations, 1971 
Emma Tennant, Two Women of London: The Strange Case of Ms Jekyll and Mrs Hyde, 1989 
Biography 
Sarah Gamble, Angela Carter: A Literary Life, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005 
Literary criticism on Angela Carter 
Elizabeth Abel, Marianne Hirsch and Elizabeth Langland (eds.), The Voyage In: Fictions of 
Female Development, University Press of New England, 1983 
Contains Ellen Cronan Rose’s essay ‘Through the Looking Glass: When Women Tell Fairy Tales’ 
The Bloody Chamber 133 

=== PDF PAGE 136 ===
Further reading 
Literacy criticism on Angela Carter, continued 
Flora Alexander, Contemporary Women Novelists, Arnold, 1989 
Discusses The Bloody Chamber, as well as Carter’s novels The Magic Toyshop and Nights at the 
Circus 
Nanette Altevers, ‘Gender Matters in The Sadeian Woman, The Review of Contemporary 
Tiction, 14:3, Fall 1994, pp. 18-23 
Discusses the issues surrounding Carter’s views on the writings of the Marquis de Sade 
Cristina Bacchilega, Postmodern Fairy Tales: Gender and Narrative Strategies, University 
of Pennsylvania Press, 1997 
Discusses the stories in The Bloody Chamber as examples of postmodern feminist fairy tales 
Joseph Bristow and Trev Lynn Broughton (eds.), The Infernal Desires of Angela Carter: 
Fiction, Femininity, Feminism, Longman, 1997 
A collection of essays examining Carter’s exploration of feminist and gender issues; includes Sally 
Keenan’s ‘Angela Carter’s The Sadeian Woman: Feminism as Treason’ and ‘The Fragile Frames of 
The Bloody Chamber’ by Lucie Armitt 
Aidan Day, Angela Carter: The Rational Glass, Manchester University Press, 1998 
Examines Carter’s fiction chronologically, with clear accounts of influences and theoretical 
interpretations 
Patricia Duncker, ‘Re-Imagining the Fairy Tales: Angela Carter’s Bloody Chambers’, 
Literature and History, 10:1, 1984, pp. 3-14 
An essay which gives a hostile reaction to The Bloody Chamber and The Sadeian Woman 
Alison Easton (ed.), Angela Carter: Contemporary Critical Essays, Palgrave Macmillan, 2000 
Part of the New Casebook Series, this work includes Merja Makinen’s essay ‘Angela Carter’s The 
Bloody Chamber and the Decolonization of Feminine Sexuality’, first published in 1992; and Sally 
Keenan’s essay ‘Angela Carter’s The Sadeian Woman-. Feminism as Treason’, first published in 1997 
Sarah Gamble (ed.), The Fiction of Angela Carter: A Reader’s Guide to Essential Criticism, 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2001 
This contains a useful and extensive bibliography of critical discussion of Carter’s work in general, 
and helpfully identifies particular texts relevant to The Bloody Chamber 
Richard J. Lane, Rod Mengham and Philip Tew (eds.), Contemporary British Fiction, Polity 
Press, 2003 
Contains Robert Eaglestone’s essay ‘The Fiction of Angela Carter’ 
134 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 137 ===
Further reading 
Kari E. Lokke, ‘“Bluebeard” and “The Bloody Chamber”: The Grotesque of Self-Parody 
and Self-Assertion’, Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, 10:1, 1988, University of 
Nebraska Press, pp. 7-12 
Examines Carter’s ‘The Bloody Chamber’ alongside Max Frisch’s novella Blaubart (Bluebeard) 
Merja Makinen, ‘Angela Carter’s The Bloody Chamber and the Decolonization of Feminine 
Sexuality’, Feminist Review, 42, Autumn 1992, pp. 2-15 
Argues against a perceived tendency to emphasise the elements of the fantastic in Carter’s writing 
Jago Morrison, Contemporary Fiction, Routledge, 2003 
Discusses significant texts by nine contemporary authors, including Carter (‘Angela Carter: 
genealogies’. Chapter 10, pp. 155-78) 
Rebecca Munford (ed.), Re-Visiting Angela Carter: Texts, Contexts, Intertexts, Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2006 
Contains Gina Wisker’s essay ‘Behind Locked Doors: Angela Carter, Horror and the Influence of 
Edgar Allan Poe’ 
Linden Peach, Angela Carter, Palgrave Macmillan, 1997 
Looks at the magical and the realist elements in Carter’s novels 
Lorna Sage, Moments of Truth: Twelve Twentieth-Century Writers, HarperCollins, 2001 
Carter is included in a study of modernism and women writers 
Lorna Sage, Women in the House of Fiction: Post-War Women Novelists, Palgrave Macmillan, 
1992 
Deals with Carter in the context of modern women novelists 
Lorna Sage (ed.), Flesh and the Mirror: Essays on the Art of Angela Carter, Virago Press, 1994 
A collection of essays on Carter’s work by several contributors 
John Sears, Angela Carter’s Monstrous Women, Sheffield Hallam University Press, 1992 
Broader perspective on feminism in Carter’s earlier works 
Marina Warner, From the Beast to the Blonde: On Fairy Tales and Their Tellers, Chatto & 
Windus, 1994 
Refers to various stories from The Bloody Chamber 
The Bloody Chamber 135 

=== PDF PAGE 138 ===
Further reading 
Background reading 
Marc Alexander, A Companion to the Folklore, Myths and Customs of Britain, Sutton 
Publishing Ltd, 2002 
A comprehensive guide to customs and legends in England, Wales and Scotland 
Helen Baehr (ed.), Women and Media, Pergamon Press, 1980 
Explores the stereotyping of women in the mass media 
Roland Barthes, Mythologies, Vintage, 1993 
This collection of essays was originally published in 1957 
Kathleen Basford, The Green Man, D. S. Brewer, 1978 
Examines the significance of the Green Man image and discusses conceptions of death, rebirth and 
resurrections in medieval times 
Frederick C. Beiser (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Hegel, Cambridge University Press, 
1993 
A thorough overview of this influential philosopher 
Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, translated by Harry Zohn and introduced by Hannah 
Arendt, Pimlico, 1999 
Contains his essay ‘The Storyteller’, in which Benjamin discusses the early folk tale 
John Berger, Ways of Seeing, Penguin, 1972 
This seminal book on art, based on a BBC television series of the same name, examines the viewer 
and the viewed 
Bruno Bettelheim, The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and Importance of Fairy Tales, 
Vintage edition, 1989 
First published in 1976 
E. Cobham Brewer, Brewer’s Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, revised by John Ayto, 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, seventeenth edition, 2007 
First published in 1870, this fascinating reference work has been revised and updated numerous times 
Robin Campbell and Linda Miller (eds.), Supporting Children in the Early Years, Trentham 
Books, 1995 
Contains Carol Fox’s essay ‘Storytelling at home and at school’ (Chapter 3) 
136 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 139 ===
Further reading 
Tess Cosslett, Talking Animals in British Children’s Fiction, 1786-1914, Ashgate, 2006 
Examines the development of anthropomorphism in children’s literature 
Richard Dawkins, A Devil’s Chaplain: Reflections on Hope, Lies, Science, and Love, Mariner 
Books, 2003 
Brings together some of the most intriguing essays of this evolutionary biologist 
Margaret Drabble (ed.), The Oxford Companion to English Literature, Oxford University 
Press, revised sixth edition, 2006 
A valuable general reference guide 
Edmund Dulac, Fairy Book: Fairy Tales of the Allied Nations, Hodder & Stoughton, 1916 
Contains stories from around the world, including the Russian fairy tale ‘Snegorotchka’, and has 
been reprinted many times 
Andrea Dworkin, Intercourse, Free Press, 1987 
Discusses virginity and the link between sexuality and power 
Andrea Dworkin, Pornography: Men Possessing Women, Women’s Press, 1981 
In this uncompromising argument against pornography Dworkin draws parallels between the life 
and work of the Marquis de Sade 
Andrea Dworkin, Woman Hating: A Radical Look at Sexuality, Dutton, 1974 
Gives a radical feminist analysis of fairy tales and literary pornography 
Terry Eagleton, After Theory, Allen Lane, 2003 
Argues that the golden age of cultural theory has ended, and examines what should follow 
Terry Eagleton, Marxism and Literary Criticism, Methuen, 1976 
Published in 2002 by Routledge with a new preface by the author 
Friedrich Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, 
University Press of the Pacific, 2005 
First published in 1886; you can read this work online: go to www.archive.org and search for the 
author and title 
Carol Fox, At the Very Edge of the Forest: The Influence of Literature on Storytelling by 
Children, Cassell, 1993 
Examines how early interactions with literature can have an enormous impact on children’s cognitive 
and linguistic development 
The Bloody Chamber 137 

=== PDF PAGE 140 ===
Further reading 
Background reading continued 
Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique, Penguin, 1992 
Originally published in 1963, this work provided inspiration for the second-wave feminists 
Emily Gerard, The Land Beyond the Forest: Facts, Figures, and Fancies from Transylvania, 
Harper & Brothers, 1888 
You can read an excerpt of an essay by Gerard which was later incorporated into her 1888 work 
online: type the author’s name and ‘Transylvanian Superstitions’ into a search engine 
Germaine Greer, The Female Eunuch, Granada edition, 1981 
This influential feminist text was first published in 1970; in it Greer writes: ‘The first significant 
discovery we shall make as we racket along our female road to freedom is that men are not free, 
and they will seek to make this an argument why nobody should be free’ 
Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Complete Fairy Tales, Routledge edition, 2002 
Contains every one of the two hundred and ten tales collected by the Grimms 
Dominic Head, The Cambridge Introduction to Modern British Fiction, 1950-2000, 
Cambridge University Press, 2002 
A thorough study of post-war British fiction which places novels in their historical and social 
context; includes a chapter on gender and social identity 
Richard Jacobs, A Beginner's Guide to Critical Reading: Readings for Students, 
Routledge, 2001 
Includes essays on Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights and John Milton’s Paradise Lost, Jacobs relates 
the latter text to the political and historical context of the English Civil War, and examines Milton’s 
work as ‘anti-authoritarian’ in relation to his role as a ‘radical pamphleteer’ 
Susanne Kappeler, The Pornography of Representation, Polity Press, 1986 
Attacks Carter’s treatment of pornography in her 1979 work The Sadeian Woman 
Anna Katsavos, ‘An Interview with Angela Carter’, The Review of Contemporary Fiction, 
14:3, fall 1994, pp. 11-17. 
Katsavos’s interview with Carter took place in 1998 
Zachary Leader (ed.), On Modern British Fiction, Oxford University Press, 2002 
Seventeen essays examining post-war British fiction by renowned writers such as Ian McEwan, 
Martin Amis and Elizabeth Jane Howard 
Howard Phillips Lovecraft, Supernatural Horror in Literature, Dover Publications, 1973 
Brief critical history of supernatural horror in literature 
138 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 141 ===
Further reading 
Niall Lucy, Postmodern Literary Theory: An Introduction, Blackwell, 1997 
Caricatures the ‘liberal humanist’ view that ‘literature is produced by writers of genius’ and opposes 
it with the view that ‘could be seen as leading to the development of postmodern literary theory’: 
‘writers themselves are produced (to varying degrees) by forces beyond their control’. Lucy believes 
this to be ‘revolutionary’ because it ‘denies that a literary text is the expression of an author’s 
intentions, feelings and linguistic mastery’ (p. 1) 
Lucien Malson, Wolf Children and the Problem of Human Nature, Monthly Review 
Press, 1972 
Psychiatrist Malson examines more than fifty cases 
Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, translated by Ernest Mandel and Ben Fowkes, Penguin, 1976 
This opening volume of Marx’s Das Kapital was first published in 1867 
Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, Lawrence & Wishart, 1973 
Unpublished during Marx’s lifetime 
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, edited by David McLellan, 
Oxford University Press, 1992 
First published in 1848; this edition includes the subsequent prefaces written by Marx and Engels 
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, Lawrence & Wishart, 1970 
Written in 1845-6, this text was not published in full until 1932 
Kate Millett, Sexual Politics, Doubleday, 1970 
A key text on the development of modern feminism 
Laura Mulvey (ed.), Visual and Other Pleasures, Macmillan, 1989 
Contains Mulvey’s essay ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’, originally published in Screen, 
16:3, Autumn 1975, pp. 6-18 
John O’Brien, Harlequin Britain: Pantomime and Entertainment, 1690-1760, John Hopkins 
University Press, 2004 
Examines the emergence of eighteenth-century British pantomime and its effect on British culture 
Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, translated by Roy Harris, 
Duckworth, 1983 
The basis of twentieth-century linguistics and much modern literary criticism, this work was 
originally published in 1916 
The Bloody Chamber 139 

=== PDF PAGE 142 ===
Further reading 
Background reading continued 
Simon Schama, Language and Memory, Alfred A. Knopf, 1995 
Contains a chapter on forests in the Western imagination 
Jacqueline Simpson and Steve Roud, A Dictionary of English Folklore, Oxford University 
Press, 2000 
An accessible and fascinating guide to English beliefs and traditions 
Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights, translated by W. G. Waters, illustrated 
by Jules Gamier and E. R. Hughes, 4 vols., Society of Bibliophiles, 1901 
Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, the original Le Piacevoli Notti was 
published in 1550 and 1553 in Italy 
Michelene Wandor (ed.), On Gender and Writing, Pandora, 1983 
Carter’s ‘Notes from the Front Line’ can be found in this work 
Jack Zipes, Breaking the Magic Spell: Radical Theories of Folk and Fairy Tales, University 
Press of Kentucky, revised edition, 2002 
Examines the lasting power of fairy tales and looks at the continuing links between literature and 
folklore. First published in 1979, the 2002 edition is revised and extended 
Jack Zipes (ed.), The Great Fairy Tale Tradition: From Straparola and Basile to the Brothers 
Grimm, W. W. Norton & Co., 2001 
Argues that the Brothers Grimm took the majority of their tales from literary sources, rather than 
collecting them from oral traditions 
Films 
The Company of Wolves, directed by Neil Jordan, 1984 
The Magic Toyshop, directed by David Wheatley, Granada TV, 1987 
Angela Carter’s Curious Room, BBC Omnibus, 1992 
t4° The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
Literary terms 
allegory a story or a situation with two different meanings, where the straightforward 
meaning on the surface is used to symbolise a deeper meaning underneath. This secondary 
meaning is often a spiritual or moral one whose values are represented by specific figures, 
characters or events in the narrative 
alliteration the repetition of the same letter or sound in a stretch of language, most often 
at the beginnings of words or on stressed syllables 
allusion a passing reference in a work of literature to something outside the text; may 
include other works of literature, myth, historical facts or biographical detail 
ambiguity the capacity of words and sentences to have double, multiple or uncertain meanings 
analogy (analogue) the comparison between an idea or object for the purpose of 
clarification or explanation; the illustration of an idea by means of a similar one; a literary 
parallel 
anthropomorphism the attribution of human characteristics and qualities to non-human 
objects or abstractions; also known as prosopopoeia (see also personification) 
aside when a character speaks in such a way that some or all of the other characters on stage 
cannot hear what is being said; or they address the audience directly. It is a device used to 
reveal a character’s private thoughts, emotions and intentions 
cliche a widely used expression which, through overuse, has lost impact and originality 
colloquial everyday speech used by people in informal situations 
commedia dell’arte a type of comic drama evolved in sixteenth-century Italy using standard, 
recognisable plots usually based on love intrigues. Plot and dialogue were often improvised, 
and the performance would often include mimic, farce, slapstick buffoonery, dancing and 
music 
conceit an extended or elaborate concept that forges an unexpected connection between 
two apparently dissimilar things 
couplet a pair of rhymed lines of any metre 
denouement the point in the story where the whole plot has finally unfolded (from the 
French for ‘untying a knot’) 
The Bloody Chamber 141 

=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
Literary teams 
deus ex machina in Greek drama a god was sometimes lowered onto the stage by a piece 
of machinery in order to assist the hero or untangle the plot (from the Latin for ‘god out 
of a machine’). The phrase is often used today to indicate an unexpected and frequently 
improbable twist in the plot 
dialect a manner of speaking or form of language peculiar to an individual or particular 
region or class; it differs from the standard language of a country 
didactic a didactic text is one that expresses its author’s intention to teach or instruct the 
reader in an explicit or implicit manner 
Enlightenment a term used to describe a literary and philosophical movement in Europe 
that had a profound faith in the powers of human reason. Beginning in the late seventeenth 
century, it continued for much of the eighteenth century 
l 
epigraph a quotation or comment placed at the beginning of a piece of work, relevant to the 
theme or content 
eponymous adjective describing the character who gives his or her name to the title of a play 
or novel 
euphemism an inoffensive word or phrase substituted for one considered offensive or hurtful 
farce a form of drama, though it can apply to any literary form, in which the comic is taken 
to extreme lengths of absurdity 
feminism a social perspective advocating the rights and claims of women arising in 
nineteenth-century Europe and re-emerging in the so-called ‘second wave’ of feminist 
writers who gained success in the 1970s. Although not a unified perspective, it had particular 
influence in the field of literary criticism in the latter part of the twentieth century 
Gothic a term originally applied to a medieval architectural style considered to be barbaric 
and uncivilised, in reference to the Dark Age tribe of the Goths. Later this term was taken 
into the identification of culture, literature or art that makes use of such stylistic reference 
points; though as a literary genre the term implies more than mere reference to architectural 
description - Gothic literature deals with passion, mystery, supernatural or horror, and 
usually employs a medieval setting such as a haunted castle or abbey 
142 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
Literary terms 
hyperbole deliberate exaggeration, used for effect (from the Greek for ‘throwing too far’) 
ideology shared beliefs of a culture which are taken for granted and thus never questioned 
imagery descriptive language which uses images to make actions, objects and characters 
more vivid in the reader’s mind. Metaphors and similes are examples of imagery 
intertextuality the explicit or implicit referencing of other texts within a work of literature. 
It is designed to put the work in the context of other literary works and traditions and 
implies parallels between them 
irony the humorous or sarcastic use of words to imply the opposite of what they normally 
mean; incongruity between what might be expected and what actually happens; the ill-timed 
arrival of an event that had been hoped for 
magic realism fiction or other art forms such as painting or cinema which combine realism 
with fantastic elements. It reminds the reader or observer that all art is created and invented. 
By the 1980s it was an established form of fiction; authors regarded as magic realists include 
Gabriel Garcia Marquez (b.l928), Salman Rushdie (b.1947), Emma Tennant (b.1938) and 
Angela Carter 
Mannerism a term that refers to European art and architecture of c. 1520-c. 1600, between 
the Italian High Renaissance and the baroque. Mannerism is identified by its insistent use 
of artificial qualities: distorted forms, exaggerated postures and unnatural lighting effects; 
stylistically it is a rejection of the ideals of harmonious composition found in Leonardo da 
Vinci (1452-1519), Raphael (1483-1520) and Michelangelo (1475-1564) 
Marxism the political and economic theories of Karl Marx (1818-83) and Friedrich Engels 
(1820-95). In Marxism the class struggle is the basic force behind historical change. The 
economic conditions of a period determine or profoundly influence the political, social and 
cultural ideology. Marxist literary criticism is concerned with the relationship between the 
historical conditions and the ideology expressed in literature and which produces the work 
materialism in philosophy the idea that nothing exists except the material world and its 
shifts or changes, as opposed, for example, to religious or spiritual belief (Marxism is a 
materialist theory) 
melodrama a form of drama in which extravagant and sensational deeds and thinly drawn 
characters occur, with strong elements of violence, sexuality and evil and a simplistic moral 
or judicial code 
The Bloody Chamber 143 

=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
Literary terms 
metaphor a figure of speech in which a word or phrase is applied to an object, a character or 
an action which does not literally belong to it, in order to imply a resemblance and create an 
unusual or striking image in the reader’s mind 
metre the rhythmic arrangement of syllables in poetic verse 
modernism a movement that spanned the period from the closing years of the nineteenth 
century to the start of the Second World War; the term covers all the creative arts. While 
many artists and writers of different outlooks and achievements are categorised as 
‘modernist’, certain principles are common, for example the rejection of established rules, 
traditions and conventions, and the exploration of abstract forms of expression. Authors 
such as T. S. Eliot (1888-1965), James Joyce (1882-1941), Virginia Woolf (1882-1941), 
D. H. Lawrence (1885-1930) and Samuel Beckett (1906-89) have all been called modernists 
narrative a story, tale or any recital of events, and the manner in which it is told. First 
person narratives (‘I’) are told from the character’s perspective and usually require the reader 
to judge carefully what is being said; second person narratives (‘you’) suggest the reader is 
part of the story; in third person narratives (‘he, ‘she’, ‘they’) the narrator may be intrusive 
(continually commenting on the story), impersonal or omniscient. More than one style of 
narrative may be used in a text 
narrator the voice telling the story or relating a sequence of events 
omniscient narrator a narrator who uses the third person narrative and has a godlike 
knowledge of events and of the thoughts and feelings of the characters 
oxymoron a figure of speech in which words with contradictory meanings are brought 
together for effect 
paradox a seemingly absurd or self-contradictory statement that is or may be true 
parody an imitation of a work of literature or a literary style designed to ridicule the original 
pastiche a form of imitation which uses pieces of the work of another writer either for comic 
effect or for acknowledgement of quality 
pathetic fallacy the attribution of human feelings to objects in nature and, commonly, 
weather systems, so that the mood of the narrator or the characters can be discerned from 
the behaviour of the surrounding environment 
144 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
Literary terms 
patriarchy a social system of government in which power is held by the elder males and 
passed to the younger males exclusively; although the term pre-dates feminism, the concept 
of patriarchy is central to the feminist perspective 
personification the treatment or description of an object or an idea as human, with human 
attributes and feelings 
postmodernism a vague term, often controversial, used to refer to tendencies and 
developments in literature and other arts since the mid twentieth century. Characterised by a 
distrust of ideologies and theories, postmodernist literature is often non-traditional, featuring 
parody, pastiche, fatalism, irony and an eclectic approach. Forms of criticism embraced by 
postmodernism include feminism, Marxism and psychoanalytic criticism. Richard Dawkins 
comments on postmodernism: ‘Never once have I heard anything that even remotely 
approaches a usable, or even faintly coherent, definition’ {A Devil’s Chaplain: Reflections 
on Hope, Lies, Science, and Love, 2003, p. 7) 
protagonist the principal character in a work of literature 
psychoanalytic criticism in literature, applying an approach to understanding a text by 
analysing the unconscious motivations of, for example, the characters 
realism literary portrayal of the ‘real’ world, in both physical and psychological detail, 
rather than an imaginary or ideal one. Victorian novels sometimes described themselves 
in this way 
revisionism in literature the rewriting or retelling of a well-known text or story in 
which characters and/or plot are changed in order to challenge the view presented in the 
original. These stories cover myths, folk and fairy tales, religious stories and narratives that 
have become embedded in the culture 
rhetoric structured and patterned language used in formal speech-making 
satire a type of literature in which folly, evil or topical issues are held up to scorn through 
ridicule, irony or exaggeration 
semiotics Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857-1913) proposed that language is made 
up of a system of signs. A sign is something that stands for something else (for example the 
word ‘chair’ stands for the ‘thing that we sit on’). The word ‘chair’ is the signifier and ‘thing 
that we sit on’ is the signified. His ideas led to the development of semiotics, which examines 
signs in such fields as literary theory, psychology and anthropology 
The Bloody Chamber 145 

=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
Literary terms 
simile a figure of speech which compares two things using the words ‘like’ or ‘as’ 
symbol something that represents something else by association 
symbolic, symbolism investing material objects with abstract powers and meanings greater 
than their own; allowing a complex idea to be represented by a single object 
synonym a word that means the same or nearly the same as another word 
tragedy in its original sense, a drama dealing with elevated actions and emotions and 
characters of high social standing in which a terrible outcome becomes inevitable as a result 
of an unstoppable sequence of events and a fatal flaw in the personality of the protagonist. 
More recently, tragedy has come to include courses of events happening to ordinary 
individuals that are inevitable because of social and cultural conditions or natural disasters 
146 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
Author of these notes 
Steve Roberts is a Senior Lecturer in English at the University of Brighton and a former 
Head of English at secondary level. He has a degree in English and Drama from Goldsmiths 
College, University of London, and worked in the theatre before becoming a teacher. He is 
the author of the York Notes Advanced titles Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and Dracula. 
The Bloody Chamber 147 

=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
Notes 
148 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
Notes 
The Bloody Chamber 149 

=== PDF PAGE 152 ===
York Notes for gcse and key stage 3 
GCSE 
Maya Angelou 
I Know Why the Caged Bird 
Sings 
Jane Austen 
Pride and Prejudice 
Alan Ayckbourn 
Absent Friends 
Elizabeth Barrett Browning 
Selected Poems 
Robert Bolt 
A Man for All Seasons 
Harold Brighouse 
Hobson's Choice 
Charlotte Bronte 
Jane Eyre 
Emily Bronte 
Wuthering Heights 
Brian Clark 
Whose Life is it Anyway? 
Robert Cormier 
Heroes 
Shelagh Delaney 
A Taste of Honey 
Charles Dickens 
David Copperfield 
Great Expectations 
Hard Times 
Oliver Twist 
Selected Stories 
Roddy Doyle 
Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha 
George Eliot 
Silas Marner 
The Mill on the Floss 
Anne Frank 
The Diary of a Young Girl 
William Golding 
Lord of the Flies 
Oliver Goldsmith 
She Stoops to Conquer 
Willis Hall 
The Long and the Short and the 
Tall 
Thomas Hardy 
Far from the Madding Crowd 
The Mayor of Casterbridge 
Tess of the d'Urbervilles 
The Withered Arm and other 
Wessex Tales 
L. P. Hartley 
The Go-Between 
Seamus Heaney 
Selected Poems 
Susan Hill 
I'm the King of the Castle 
Barry Hines 
A Kestrel for a Knave 
Louise Lawrence 
Children of the Dust 
Harper Lee 
To Kill a Mockingbird 
Laurie Lee 
Cider with Rosie 
Arthur Miller 
The Crucible 
A View from the Bridge 
Robert O'Brien 
Z for Zachariah 
Frank O'Connor 
My Oedipus Complex and 
Other Stories 
George Orwell 
Animal Farm 
J. B. Priestley 
An Inspector Calls 
When We Are Married 
Willy Russell 
Educating Rita 
Our Day Out 
J. D. Salinger 
The Catcher in the Rye 
William Shakespeare 
Henry IV Part I 
Henry V 
Julius Caesar 
Macbeth 
The Merchant of Venice 
A Midsummer Night's Dream 
Much Ado About Nothing 
Romeo and Juliet 
The Tempest 
Twelfth Night 
George Bernard Shaw 
Pygmalion 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein 
R.C. Sherriff 
Journey's End 
Rukshana Smith 
Salt on the snow 
John Steinbeck 
Of Mice and Men 
Robert Louis Stevenson 
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde 
Jonathan Swift 
Gulliver's Travels 
Robert Swindells 
Daz4Zoe 
Mildred D. Taylor 
Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry 
Mark Twain 
Huckleberry Finn 
James Watson 
Talking in Whispers 
Edith Wharton 
Ethan Frome 
William Wordsworth 
Selected Poems 
A Choice of Poets 
Mystery Stories of the 
Nineteenth Century including 
The Signalman 
Nineteenth Century Short 
Stories 
Poetry of the First World War 
Six Women Poets 
For the AQA Anthology: 
Duffy and Armitage <S Pre-1914 
Poetry 
Heaney and Clarke & Pre-1914 
Poetry 
Poems from Different Cultures 
Key Stage 3 
William Shakespeare 
Henry V 
Macbeth 
Much Ado About Nothing 
Richard III 
The Tempest 
150 The Bloody Chamber 

=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
York Notes Advanced 
Margaret Atwood 
Cat's Eye 
The Handmaid's Tale 
Jane Austen 
Emma 
Mansfield Park 
Persuasion 
Pride and Prejudice 
Sense and Sensibility 
William Blake 
Songs of Innocence and of 
Experience 
The Brontes 
Selected Poems 
Charlotte Bronte 
Jane Eyre 
Villette 
Emily Bronte 
Wuthering Heights 
Angela Carter 
The Bloody Chamber 
Nights at the Circus 
Wise Children 
Geoffrey Chaucer 
The Franklin's Prologue and Tale 
The Merchant's Prologue and Tale 
The Miller's Prologue and Tale 
The Pardoner's Tale 
The Prologue to the 
Canterbury Tales 
The Wife of Bath's Prologue 
and Tale 
Caryl Churchill 
Top Girls 
John Clare 
Selected Poems 
Joseph Conrad 
Heart of Darkness 
Charles Dickens 
Bleak House 
Great Expectations 
Hard Times 
Emily Dickinson 
Selected Poems 
Carol Ann Duffy 
Selected Poems 
The World's Wife 
George Eliot 
Middlemarch 
The Mill on the Floss 
T. S. Eliot 
Selected Poems 
The Waste Land 
F. Scott Fitzgerald 
The Great Gatsby 
John Ford 
'Tis Pity She's a Whore 
Michael Frayn 
Spies 
Charles Frazier 
Cold Mountain 
Brian Friel 
Making History 
Translations 
William Golding 
The Spire 
Thomas Hardy 
Jude the Obscure 
The Mayor of Casterbridge 
The Return of the Native 
Selected Poems 
Tess of the d'Urbervilles 
Seamus Heaney 
Selected Poems from 'Opened 
Ground' 
Nathaniel Hawthorne 
The Scarlet Letter 
Homer 
The Iliad 
The Odyssey 
Aldous Huxley 
Brave New World 
Henrik Ibsen 
A Doll's House 
Kazuo Ishiguro 
The Remains of the Day 
James Joyce 
Dubliners 
John Keats 
Selected Poems 
Philip Larkin 
High Windows 
The Whitsun Weddings and 
Selected Poems 
Ian McEwan 
Atonement 
Christopher Marlowe 
Doctor Faustus 
Edward II 
Arthur Miller 
All My Sons 
Death of a Salesman 
John Milton 
Paradise Lost Books I & II 
Toni Morrison 
Beloved 
George Orwell 
Nineteen Eighty-Four 
Sylvia Plath 
Selected Poems 
William Shakespeare 
Antony and Cleopatra 
As You Like It 
Hamlet 
Henry IV Part I 
King Lear 
Macbeth 
Measure for Measure 
The Merchant of Venice 
A Midsummer Night's Dream 
Much Ado About Nothing 
Othello 
Richard II 
Richard III 
Romeo and Juliet 
The Taming of the Shrew 
The Tempest 
Twelfth Night 
The Winter's Tale 
Mary Shelley 
Frankenstein 
Richard Brinsley Sheridan 
The School for Scandal 
Bram Stoker 
Dracula 
Alfred Tennyson 
Selected Poems 
Alice Walker 
The Color Purple 
John Webster 
The Duchess of Malfi 
The White Devil 
Oscar Wilde 
The Importance of Being Earnest 
A Woman of No Importance 
Tennessee Williams 
Cat on a Hot Tin Roof 
The Glass Menagerie 
A Streetcar Named Desire 
Jeanette Winterson 
Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit 
Virginia Woolf 
To the Lighthouse 
William Wordsworth 
The Prelude and Selected Poems 
W. B. Yeats 
Selected Poems 
Poetry of the First World War 
The Bloody Chamber 151 

=== PDF PAGE 154 ===
*• 
' 
■ 
■ 

=== PDF PAGE 155 ===


=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
Do you want a better understanding of the text? 
Do you want to know what the critics say? 
Do you want to improve your grade? 
WHATEVER YOU WANT, YORK NOTES CAN HELP. 
York Notes Advanced offer a fresh and accessible approach to 
English Literature. This market-leading series has been completely 
updated to meet the needs of today's A-level and undergraduate 
students. Written by established literature experts, York Notes 
Advanced introduce students to more sophisticated analysis, 
a range of critical perspectives and wider contexts. 
YORK NOTES ADVANCED - 
THE ULTIMATE LITERATURE GUIDES. 
KEY FEATURES 
Summaries with detailed commentaries 
Extended commentaries on key passages 
Discussion of themes and literary techniques 
Contrasting critical perspectives 
Author biography 
Historical and literary background 
Check the net/film/book features 
Annotated further reading 
Glossary of literary terms 
Self-test questions 
www.yorknotes.com 
Cover Image 
Getty Images: Norbet Rosing/ 
National Geographic 