

=== PDF PAGE 1 ===



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===

W omen Playing Men

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===

WOMEN PLAYING MEN
Yue Opera and Social Change in Twentieth-Century Shanghai
JIN JIANG
University of Washington Press
Seattle and London


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===

The publication of Women Playing Men: Yue Opera and Social Change in Twentieth-Century 
Shanghai was generously supported by the Chiang Ching-Kuo Foundation for International
Scholarly Exchange and by the Donald R. Ellegood International Publications Endowment. 
© 2009 by the University of Washington Press
Printed in United States of America
Designed by Veronica Seyd
14 13 12 11 10 09    5 4 3 2 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
University of Washington Press
PO Box 50096, Seattle, WA  98145
www.washington.edu/uwpress
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Jiang, Jin. 
Women playing men : Yue opera and social change in twentieth-century Shanghai /
Jin Jiang. 
p.  cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-295-98843-6 (hbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-295-98844-3 (pbk. :
alk. paper) 
1. Theater—China—Shaoxing—History and criticism.  2. Folk drama, Chinese—
China—Shaoxing—History and criticism.  3. Women in opera.  4. Popular
 culture—China—Shanghai.  I. Title.  II. Title: Yue opera and social change in
twentieth-century Shanghai. 
PN2876.S53J53  2008 
792.0951'132—dc22 2008024174
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National
Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials,
ANSI Z 39.48–1984.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===

Dedicated to the memory of my dear mother
PANG WENRUI (1920–2002)
and to my father
JIANG PEINAN

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===

Contents
Preface   ix
Introduction / Opera, Gender, and the City   3
Chapter 1 / The Origins of Yue Opera   26
Chapter 2 / The Rise of Feminine Opera   60
Chapter 3 / Patrons and Patronage   106
Chapter 4 / Staging in the Public Arena   139
Chapter 5 / The Opera as History   173
Chapter 6 / A Feminine Aesthetics   215
Conclusion   251
Appendix / Interviews and Informants   269
Notes   275
Chinese Character Glossary   303
References   313
Index   331
vii

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===



=== PDF PAGE 10 ===

ix
Preface
This book attempts to seize a moment in the history of Chinese women,
of Shanghai, and of China’s nascent modernity before it is lost. It pres-
ents a social and cultural history of the unique phenomenon of an all-female
theater, “women’s Yue opera” (nüzi Yueju [lit., “women’s Zhejiang opera”]),
or simply “Yue opera” (Yueju), in the context of the rise of an urban pop-
ular culture in modern Shanghai. Women’s Yue opera, which originated in
the Zhejiang countryside, became a popular form of theater, specializing
in love dramas, between the 1930s and 1960s in the metropolis of Shang-
hai. Banned during the Cultural Revolution (1966–76), it was revived imme-
diately after, only to become a theater enjoyed by a small number of fans
and art professionals in more recent decades. If each era has its own pop-
ular culture, and if China’s reform era has adopted a globalized popular
culture of rock and roll and gongfu movies, then women’s opera represents
a popular-culture phenomenon of a past era. Although the opera has
retained its artistic identity and will continue to be performed into the
 conceivable future, the social, political, and cultural signiﬁcance it bore in
previous periods is rapidly being replaced by a new set of contemporary
meanings. The actresses and audiences who made Yue opera a popular phe-
nomenon were aging as I began my research in the mid-1990s, and many
have since passed away. It is urgent to preserve the voices of the women
of Yue opera, speaking directly about their relationship with the opera and
what the opera has meant to them. Moreover, while some earlier per-
formances have been preserved on audio- and videotapes, the historical
context and human relationships that shaped these productions must be
rescued, or they will be lost. 

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===

I arrived on the scene in time to carry out some of the rescue work, con-
ducting the ﬁrst round of interviews in 1995–96 and following up with more
interviews and conversations. The most important of these were interviews
with actresses in the ﬁrst and second generations of Yue opera, who per-
soniﬁed the opera’s success. Born during the 1920s into rural and peasant
families in the poor countryside of Zhejiang, these women, who were mostly
illiterate, joined opera schools in their early teens in order to make a liv-
ing; they drifted to Shanghai with the ﬂow of Zhejiang immigrants in the
1930s and 1940s and, with their performances both in the theater and in
society, established Yue opera as the most popular theater in the city dur-
ing the ensuing decades. The stories they told about their lives and careers
not only testify to the genre’s history but also reveal the ways in which
these women allowed various rhetorics to mediate their narratives of this
history and their own experiences. 
The audience members I interviewed were mostly from middle- or upper-
class families with education levels ranging from primary school to col-
lege. They are representative of the most important part of the audience,
those who helped shape the opera with their ﬁnancial, social, and emo-
tional support. Their stories, combined with the actresses’ recollections of
female patrons and fans, provide access to the social and imaginary worlds
of middle-class housewives and daughters. These women, the Yue opera
actresses and audience members, represented a large segment of the female
population in Shanghai in the middle decades of the twentieth century.
This segment of the city’s population and Yue opera as a major popular-
culture production of this group have so far been overlooked in studies of
modern Chinese history. The negligence has much to do with the modern
Chinese political and intellectual leadership, which, for most of the twen-
tieth century, was not interested in popular culture but focused on rescu-
ing China from imperialism and building it into a modern nation and state.
The Nationalist government (1928–49) and the People’s Republic of China
(PRC [1949–present]) each made efforts to mobilize the population for its
version of nation building, and both attempted to use popular arts as means
of mass education and mobilization. In the eyes of this leadership, market-
oriented popular arts that focused on the private, mundane concerns of indi-
vidual citizens were unnecessary, selﬁsh, and trivial, to say the least, and
harmful and dangerous, at worst, as they encouraged people to indulge their
personal feelings and kept them from devoting themselves to the nation.
Thus, both left-wing and Nationalist intellectuals criticized popular litera-
ture of the Republican period (1912–49), lumping different strains together
x Preface

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===

under the pejorative term “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies school of ﬁction,”
and studies of popular literature did not begin to emerge until the 1980s.
Similarly, while the Nationalist government despised popular theaters and
entertainments, the PRC government tried to transform them into state prop-
aganda tools with which to glorify the communist revolution. 
Besides suffering the elite bias against popular genres in general, women’s
opera was stigmatized further because of lingering prejudices against
women and women’s culture. Modern China’s intellectual and political lead-
ership promoted and popularized the concept of liberating women from
the “feudal” tradition marked by bound feet, arranged marriage, and lack
of access to education and work outside the home. The problem is that
the elite assumed the role of liberator, and the concept of women’s liber-
ation was shaped largely within the framework of nation building: women
had to be liberated in order to better serve the nation as good mothers,
good wives, good teachers, good workers, and even good soldiers. Both
the Nationalist Party (Guomindang) and the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) demanded that women revolutionaries act within the frameworks
of their respective Party ideologies, considering a separate women’s move-
ment narrow-minded, unnecessary, and unacceptable. While giving women
intellectuals little room to establish their subject position as women,
1 both
parties also shared a contemptuous attitude toward women who had little
interest in or appeared unsusceptible to political and intellectual nation-
building discourses—the Nationalists largely counted these women out,
and the Communists tried to reform them. For both Nationalist and Chi-
nese Communist parties, the illiterate actresses and bourgeois housewives
and daughters associated with Yue opera appeared to be a backward mass
indulging in its own small, mundane concerns of sex, love, and the family,
ignorant of national politics. The opera also became notorious for elabo-
rating the purportedly excessive, trivial emotions of love and desire while
having little concern for the nation’s struggle. Thus, in the name of the
nation, the old misogynist bias sneaked back in under the new rhetoric of
women’s liberation, denying historical signiﬁcance to a large number of
women and their culture. 
These elite biases against popular and women’s cultures were com-
pounded with a methodological pitfall in the study of modern China’s
history, namely heavy reliance on written texts and printed discourses.
Reliance on written materials inevitably gives privilege to elite activities,
since intellectual and political elites, mostly men, produced much of the
written texts of the period. While such research is not necessarily thereby
Preface    xi

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===

rendered invalid and may be valuable when taken on its own terms, col-
lectively it nonetheless may have produced an understanding of history
that overemphasizes elite inﬂuences while viewing popular activities only
as “resistance” to elite intentions. The paucity of voices coming directly
from the nonwriting public could have the effect of reducing the majority
of Chinese people to objects of elite intentions. Similarly, the lack of
women’s voices could render Chinese women subalterns in history, with
the result that feminist and women’s histories of China are framed as cri-
tiques of male elite use of women’s issues for men’s political purposes rather
than focusing on issues and signiﬁcations that concerned women. It is thus
crucial to ﬁnd the voices of these subalterns through oral and performance-
related materials outside the print media, and Yue opera provides precisely
such a source. 
My discovery of Yue opera was actually a rediscovery of an experience
from my Shanghai childhood. When I entered primary school in 1962, the
government assigned my mother to work as an administrator for the Shang-
hai Yue Opera House. I often went to the theater with my mother for
evening performances because there was no one at home to take care of
me. My mother would put me on one of the front seats reserved for her
while she worked backstage. My classmates and friends considered me
extremely fortunate because the opera was very popular and tickets were
hard to obtain. But college-educated Chinese revolutionaries, including my
mother, who was not happy with her job assignment, generally looked down
on local operas as old-fashioned and backward, and Yue opera, with its love
stories, was considered particularly vulgar and trivial. Sure enough, this
childhood experience was buried in my memory after I entered college in
the late 1970s. Absorbed in the grand narratives of the nation’s modern
destiny, I stopped going to the opera. It was during my years at Stanford
University in the 1990s, informed by the emerging trend of cultural stud-
ies in the most general sense, that I reconnected with this childhood expe-
rience and became determined to register the voices and experiences of
these women in historical writings. 
When I went back to Shanghai in 1995–96 to research the topic, I found
that my mother loved Yue opera. In her retirement, she enjoyed listening
to Yue opera and Beijing opera tapes and watched the opera channel almost
every day. My father, also a college-educated New Culturist and a fan of
spoken drama, had considered local opera backward and feudal when he
was younger; now local operas on television were his favorite entertain-
ment. Among a variety of local opera genres, Yue opera and Beijing opera
xii Preface

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===

were my parents’ favorites: my mother favored Yue opera over Beijing opera,
while my father preferred Beijing opera to Yue opera (a typical gender divi-
sion in China’s opera culture). Though it was now too late, my mother even
regretted that she had not learned to write scripts for Yue opera. My par-
ents never explained their newfound appreciation of native operas to me,
as if it had all happened naturally and there was nothing to explain. They
were retired from their job assignments and perhaps also from the revolu-
tion and revolutionary rhetoric, at least to some degree. They could now
just enjoy themselves or be entertained by anything that appealed to their
senses, without feeling the need to judge their tastes according to exter-
nal standards. Their appreciation of native operas, in other words, was not
the result of a sudden realization of the social and political signiﬁcance of
these forms. They were indeed puzzled by my interest in Yue opera, think-
ing that important historical events and ﬁgures would have been more
appropriate subjects, not an insigniﬁcant type of theater that only enter-
tained. Mother had great respect for her actress colleagues at the Shang-
hai Yue Opera House, whom she regarded as independent, resourceful, and
hardworking women, and introduced many of them to me for interviews,
but she still thought I should have picked a more important topic than Yue
opera. 
Interestingly, the majority of Yue opera actresses and audience mem-
bers were not concerned about the stigma placed on them by people who
were better educated in elite ideologies. The women of Yue opera func-
tioned within a world of value of their own making and made judgments
based on their own perspectives. Yue opera plays were considered shame-
less in depicting excessive romantic emotions, while Yue opera fans were
thought to be notorious for their unrestrained public displays of passion
for their favorite actresses and for the genre. Political and intellectual elites
dismissed the theatrical and social world of Yue opera as trivial and mean-
ingless, as they were unable to understand it within their own ideological
frameworks. In order to understand the world of Yue opera, the historian
must enter it by exploring the mundane experiences of the women of Yue
opera and leave ideology at the door. “Courageous, empirical ﬁdelity to
experience can, under certain circumstances at least,” as Peter Fuller points
out, “cut through ideology. Experience is not wholly determined by ideol-
ogy: it is very often at odds with it, causing constant ruptures and ﬁssures
within the ideological ice-ﬂoes.”
2 An empirical study of Yue opera is likely
to produce different pictures and refresh our understanding of the history
of modern China. 
Preface    xiii

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===

Grounded in testimonies of Yue opera’s women and theatrical produc-
tions, and aided by archival, newspaper and tabloid, and other historical
records, this work attempts to reconstruct a meaningful world of Yue opera
as it existed for the opera’s actresses and fans. A variety of oral and per-
formance-oriented sources provides access to the experiential and imagi-
nary world of Yue opera women. Onstage performances (recorded or live),
their reception in the larger public arena, performers’ narratives of their
lives and art, and audience members’ accounts of the impact this art had
on their lives are fascinating materials for historical analysis of what I call
the “Yue opera phenomenon,” a highly visible public display of women’s
emotions in a growing urban society. 
Such an approach yields a history that shows, in contrast to the elite
bias, that Yue opera was an important cultural production answering the
needs of a newly forming urban society. The Yue opera love drama repre-
sented an effort to explore dramatic changes in sex, gender, and family rela-
tions in a rapidly modernizing city, and it helped the new urban dweller
connect with these changes. Supported not only by women but also by
the general public, the Yue opera love drama developed an artistic sophis-
tication that brought the genre national and international recognition. Yue
opera masterpieces, including Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai (Liang Shanbo
yu Zhu Yingtai), known since the 1950s as The Butterﬂy Lovers, and Dream of
the Red Chamber (Honglou meng), had a far-reaching inﬂuence on the pop-
ular understanding of love and desire, gender and family relations, and the
ethics and aesthetics of a modern urban life. 
Viewed within the vast world of popular culture, it becomes clear that
popular genres such as Yue opera mattered; elite ideologies appeared to be
remote and often irrelevant, while the radical leftist invasion during the
Cultural Revolution was destructive. Also, contrary to elite bias, popular-
culture genres in general were not at all opposed to building a modern,
strong Chinese nation, and many major productions placed their stories
against the backdrop of landmark national events. The difference lies in
the focus: while elite ideologies made the nation-state their top concern,
requesting people to serve the state, popular productions focused on
people and their mundane lives, oftentimes inﬂuenced by the status of the
nation-state. In short, the popular-culture regime had its own value and
was full of meanings that were important to the population. These values
and meanings may not have entirely agreed with elite ideologies but were
equally inﬂuential in shaping the nation’s modern citizenry. 
While the agenda of popular history is to give voice to the subalterns
xiv Preface

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===

in historical studies, such projects are undertaken not by the silenced people
themselves but by historians on their behalf, and most historians write for
their academic colleagues. Yet, as Stuart Hall points out in his discussion
of Gramsci, there would be no “organic intellectual formation . . . without
‘an analogous movement on the part of the mass’” who “rise themselves to
higher levels of culture and . . . extend their circle of inﬂuence towards the
stratum of specialized intellectuals, producing...  g r o u p s  o f  m o r e  o r  less
importance.”
3 That is, the alleged subalterns, in fact, have raised their voices
in the popular realm and asserted their inﬂuence in society; in that regard,
they needed no help from professional historians. These people and the
popular phenomena they created, however, are underrepresented in writ-
ten history, and it is up to the historian to incorporate their stories into
broader historical narratives. This book thus does not intend, and cannot
claim, to speak for the people who created the Yue opera phenomenon; it
is rather an effort to register the experiences and imaginations of these
people and to understand the signiﬁcance of their stories in the history of
modern China. 
Preface    xv

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===



=== PDF PAGE 18 ===

xvii
Acknowledgments
I am eternally grateful to two great mentors, Harold L. Kahn and Lyman P.
Van Slyke, who not only taught me high standards of scholarship but more-
over continuously exemplified for me ways to live a moral and fulfilling
life. Their wisdom, humor, and guidance have supported me through the
past years. Van shared with me the story of his beloved aunt, who became
an actress and, although disowned by her father for her choice of profes-
sion, provided for Van’s father’s education—a story that resonates with the
experiences of the Chinese actresses  featured in this book. Hal’s comment
that “drama imitates life imitating drama” helped me to see the Yue opera
history as a process by which the actresses, the audience, and the opera
mutually constructed one another in creating a public-culture phenome-
non. It was during numerous such interactions with my teachers that this
project was incubated and began to take shape.
I am also grateful to Gail Hershatter, Hanchao Lu, Edward Gunn, and
Timothy Brook, who carefully read through an early version of the entire
manuscript and offered constructive and detailed suggestions for revision.
Their insights helped me to make the book conceptually clearer, more
focused, and better structured. Bryna Goodman, Thomas Metzger, Eliza-
beth Perry, Charlotte Furth, Susan Mann, Wen-hsin Yeh, Dorothy Ko, P. J.
Ivanhoe, Chen Jian, Mary Lou Roberts, Paul Robinson, Ann Waltner, Tobie
Meyer-Fong, and Shannon Sweeney read and commented on parts of the
work at various stages, and their questions and critiques were very useful
as I struggled to make sense of the manifold materials. I especially want to
thank Reiko Shinno and Mark Swislocki for their friendship and generous
assistance. Reiko’s enthusiasm about the project and our numerous conver -

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===

sations were both fun and inspiring, while Mark faithfully proofread every
chapter for ideas as well as for errors.
I want to thank my former colleagues Martha Kaplan, John Kelley, Shao
Jing, Yu Zhou, Peipei Qiu, Aili Mu, Maria Hoehn, and Ismail Rashid for
reading and commenting on various parts of the work. Questions and  criti -
cisms from Max K’o-wu Huang, Chien-ming Yu, Ping-chen Hsiung, Chen
Yung-fa, I-chun Fan, Hsiao-T’i Li, and other colleagues at Academia Sinica
and from Kohama Masako, Suetsugu Reiko, Nishimura Shigeo, Shao
Yingjian, Egami Sachiko, Maeyama Kanako, Ishikawa Teruko, and Sato
Masayuki over my various talks on the subject in Taipei and Tokyo were
challenging and stimulating. I especially want to thank local Yue opera
researchers Ding Yi and Qian Yonglin at the Yue Opera Museum in Sheng -
zhou (formerly Shengxian), Zhejiang; Gao Yilong, Lu Shijun, and Huang
Dejun in the research branch at the Shanghai Yue Opera House; and Qiu
Yawei and Qiu Wenguang with the Shengxian Native Place Organization
in Taipei, who generously shared their ideas with me and allowed me to
have access to their collections, interview records, stage photos, and pre-
cious old Yue opera recordings. In addition, Chang P’eng-yuan at Acade-
mia Sinica kindly gave me his personal copies of the precious eight volumes
The Complete Works of Qi Rushan. Credit is also due to Zhang Jishun, Xu Jilin,
Yu Weimin, and Li Beibei for their support and wonderful collegiality. 
Special appreciation goes to the librarians who assisted me in the East
Asian Collections at Stanford University, the Harvard-Yenching Library
at Harvard University, the Shanghai Municipal Library, the Shanghai
Municipal Archives, the District Archives of Hongkou and Huangpu in
Shanghai, the Yue Opera Museum in Shengzhou, the Library of the To¯y o¯
bunka kenkyu ¯jo at Tokyo University, the National Library of Japan, the
Foreign Affairs Archives in Tokyo, the Fu Ssu-Nien Library of the Insti-
tute of History and Philology, and the libraries in the Institute of Litera-
ture and Philosophy and the Institute of Modern History at the Academia
Sinica in Taipei. Without their efforts, patience, and willingness to help,
this project would not have been possible. 
I would like to express my gratitude to Lorri Hagman at the University
of Washington Press for her faith in this project as well as for her patience
and guidance. The comments from an anonymous reviewer for the Press
pushed me to further revise and improve the chapter on the audience for
opera. Laura Iwasaki proved to be an excellent copyeditor who meticulously
corrected typos and inconsistencies in the rendering of translated terms and
smoothed the flow of the text. Correspondence with Mary Ribesky has been
xviii Acknowledgments

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===

a pleasant experience as she is always warm, professional, and responsive.
Because of them, the production process was an enjoyable  experience. 
Risako Ide kindly checked romanization for Japanese sources. My stu-
dents also helped prepare the manuscript: Mauricio Castro checked the
references and notes, Jin Tao helped with stylistic details, and Li Bin aided
in the preparation of the Index. I am deeply grateful to the many friends,
students, and colleagues who helped to make the book better, although I
have no way to list everyone who has helped. All remaining mistakes are,
of course, mine.
A Fellowship for the Study of Women in Asia from the Center for East
Asian Studies at Stanford University funded a four-month research trip
to mainland China, and a grant from the American Council of Learned
 Societies/ Chiang Ching-Kuo Foundation enabled me to spend six months
at the To¯y o¯ bunka kenkyu¯jo in Tokyo, Japan, and three months at the Aca-
demia Sinica in Taipei. Summer grants from Vassar College supported mul-
tiple research trips to mainland China, and a grant from the Pujiang Talents
Program sponsored by the Shanghai Municipal Government supported the
final stage of this work.
This book is dedicated to my late mother, whose aspiration to live a
meaningful life by expressing her literary talent beyond political and domes-
tic boundaries has inspired and shaped my academic career, and to my father,
who provided an open, liberal, and intellectually stimulating family envi-
ronment for me and my brothers and sister to grow up in freely. 
Acknowledgments    xix

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===



=== PDF PAGE 22 ===

Women Playing Men

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===

Geographical expansion of Shengxian opera 

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===

3
Introduction
Opera, Gender, and the City
One of the most important cultural changes in modern China was the fem-
inine opera culture that grew out of its Qing period (1644–1911) mascu-
line predecessor. This modern feminine opera culture achieved its most
mature form in several popular opera genres, including “ping opera” (pingju),
which ﬂourished in Tianjin; Yue opera, which became popular in Shang-
hai; and the “boy-singers’ opera” (gezaixi), which thrived in Xiamen (later
Taipei). The rise of a feminine opera culture in coastal cities reveals much
about the gendered nature of social and cultural changes in the twentieth
century. 
Women’s Yue opera, a popular social and cultural phenomenon created
by the actresses and audiences of Yue opera in Shanghai, was a concen-
trated expression of the historical rise of women in public culture in mod-
ern Chinese society. It was also the most popular theater in Shanghai for
half a century, from the late 1930s through the 1980s. Although women’s
Yue opera originated in the countryside of Sheng county (Shengxian,
present-day Shengzhou City), Zhejiang, it took shape in Shanghai in the
1930s, where it underwent two major transformations—from a rural to an
urban entertainment and from all-male to all-female performers. The opera
thrived in Shanghai in the 1940s to such an extent that it overtook Beijing
opera and the native “Shanghai opera” (Shenqu or Huju) to become the
most popular theater in the city. In the 1950s and 1960s, the opera gained
national and international inﬂuence through frequent performance tours
as well as ﬁlms of Yue opera master plays such as The Butterﬂy Lovers, of 1953,
and Dream of the Red Chamber, of 1962, and became, arguably, second only
to Beijing opera on a nationwide scale in terms of the size of its personnel


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===

and audience. Why and how did a female opera capture such a large audi-
ence, and what does Yue opera’s success tell us about the gendered nature
of China’s cultural modernity? More speciﬁcally, perhaps, as Shanghai nur-
tured women’s Yue opera, in what sense did the opera embody some of the
city’s peculiar gender and popular characteristics?
One answer to these questions lies in the love drama that tied the opera,
the audiences, and the city together in forging a peculiar urban popular
culture. Romantic love became one of the most important themes in pop-
ular culture as new patterns of family, gender, and sexual relationships began
to emerge in twentieth-century Chinese society, which was undergoing
tremendous modernization. While this transformation was occurring
nationwide, changing family, gender, and sexual relationships had their most
concentrated manifestations in treaty-port cities and generated an overﬂow
of cultural products that reﬂected these changes in the form of the love
drama. The love drama became an essential element in various genres,
encompassing elite melodramatic productions of leftist ﬁlms in the 1930s
and 1940s as well as popular literature and entertainment such as “man-
darin ducks and butterﬂies” ﬁction,
1 “Shanghai-style” (Haipai) literature,
Shanghai opera, and women’s Yue opera. As a response to the popular need
to address these deeply felt changes, this culture of love in turn discursively
shaped popular perceptions and understandings of changing sex and gen-
der relationships.
Ever since the May Fourth New Culture Movement (roughly 1915–23),
popular ﬁction and entertainment focusing on the emotion of love, or yan-
qing (lit., “elaborating on feelings”) culture, was a target of criticism from
China’s intellectual and political elites, and international scholars overlooked
it as they privileged studies in elite culture. This situation began to change
dramatically in the 1980s, and a great number of monographs on Repub-
lican Shanghai’s popular culture have since appeared. Perry Link led the
way with his pioneering study of the “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies”
school of ﬁction, while in the 1990s, Wei Shaochang, Wang Dewei (David
Wang), Zhang Gansheng, Yang Yi, and Wu Fuhui followed up with more
detailed and expanded studies of popular ﬁction in Republican era Shang-
hai. In the meantime, Paul Pickowicz, Yingjin Zhang, and Poshek Fu exam-
ined popular ﬁlm of the period, and Leo Ou-Fan Lee’s 1999 study surveyed
the ﬁelds of ﬁction, ﬁlm, and café as representatives of a modern urban cul-
ture in Republican Shanghai. Together, these works created a rich litera-
ture of popular ﬁction and ﬁlm in Republican Shanghai and explored the
question of the city’s cultural modernity.
2
4 Introduction

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===

Building on the existing literature, this investigation of women and gen-
der in Shanghai’s popular-culture scenes intervenes with its chosen tem-
poral and spatial strategies. Temporally speaking, the existing scholarship
focused on Republican Shanghai, with an underlying assumption that the
communist takeover in 1949 caused a rupture in the city’s cultural devel-
opment. However, as an increasing number of China historians question
whether the change of regimes in 1949 should be taken as the line divid-
ing modern Chinese history, the cultural historian needs to follow cultural
changes into the People’s Republic of China in order to examine continu-
ities and ruptures after 1949 and to develop a fuller picture of cultural
changes in modern China. As the footsteps of Yue opera actresses crossed
the 1949 divide, and Yue opera continued to develop under communism,
this investigation follows its subjects into the popular-culture scenes of CCP-
run Shanghai. 
Spatially, this volume is designed as a social history of popular culture
in modern Shanghai and, as such, is located at the intersection of social
history and cultural studies. Cultural studies treats cultural phenomena as
meaning systems that individuals and social groups create for themselves
under certain circumstances. The strategy of the social history of culture
is to focus on the producers and recipients of culture and thereby to observe
changing social structures and power relations. Viewed from this angle,
women’s Yue opera was a social phenomenon closely related to the emer-
gence of women into urban public space and changing gender relations in
urban society during the period. The story of Yue opera thus takes us to
areas that have not yet been adequately explored in studies of the city’s
public culture, namely, women’s cultural activities and “traditional” native
operas as important components of an overall picture of Shanghai’s cul-
tural modernity.
Women’s Culture
Feminist and gender analysis provides the most important framework for
this study, one that enables the historian to “discover” a women’s culture
centered on Yue opera in modern Shanghai’s public space. The rich text
of this women’s culture reveals three historical processes: the rise of the
opera, the rise of its actresses, and the rise of a large female audience in
Republican Shanghai. Furthermore, an investigation centered on Yue opera
reveals a more general trend of feminization of popular entertainment.
Researchers of Shanghai culture, such as Leo Lee and Yingjin Zhang,
Introduction    5

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===

have noticed the prominence of women and female images in Shanghai’s
popular-culture industry. They, however, have concerned themselves
mainly with questions such as how men produced and consumed female
images in the public domain, or what kind of meanings women and female
images provoked in the minds of urban men. Few saw women as active pro-
ducers of culture, and the important phenomenon of feminization of pop-
ular entertainment went unnoticed. 
This volume focuses on women as historical agents and cultural builders
who created the Yue opera phenomenon. The core narrative of this work
concerns the trio of the opera, its actresses, and its female audience in mod-
ern Shanghai, exploring how the female producers and consumers of Yue
opera made the opera such a success, and how the rise of the opera in turn
helped these women redeﬁne their social status and identity. It follows the
lead of a cluster of inspiring feminist studies in the history of women and
gender in China offered by such historians as Charlotte Furth, Gail Her-
shatter, Dorothy Ko, and Susan Mann that ﬁnd women actively contributing
to and at the center of historical changes.
3
In his study of the means by which jazz was transmitted from black Amer-
ican ghettos to British suburbs, Simon Frith notes: “To understand why (and
how) the worlds of jazz (and rock) are young men’s worlds we have, for
example, to understand what it means to grow up male and middle-class;
to understand the urge to ‘authenticity’ we have to understand the strange
fear of being ‘inauthentic.’”
4 Similarly, to understand Yue opera is to under-
stand what it meant to be female and immigrant in a modern metropolis
during an era of profound social change, and in order to understand the
urge to display emotions publicly through staging or attending Yue opera
performances, we have to understand the pain of being silenced or not taken
seriously, for such existential conditions sparked the particular experiences
and emotions that underlay the ethics and aesthetics of the opera. As the
actresses and audience of Yue opera struggled for respect and status, and
for the right to express themselves publicly, they created a distinct women’s
culture—a deﬁning monument in Shanghai’s cultural landscape.
The rise of women in society represents arguably the most fundamen-
tal change in China in the twentieth century, a change that affected every
aspect of Chinese life. Women’s entrance into the cultural market, both as
consumers and producers, represented perhaps the most important force
in shaping a modern culture of love in twentieth-century Shanghai, while
women’s Yue opera was the most concentrated manifestation of this fem-
inine power. Through the success of women’s opera, the actresses and audi-
6 Introduction

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===

ence of Yue opera helped establish private feelings and mundane experi-
ences as a major theme of modern life, making the “feminine” concerns of
the everyday equally as important as the “masculine” public discourse of
nationalism and modernity. 
Popular Opera
Studying Shanghai culture at the level of popular opera opens a way toward
probing a world outside the print universe. Chinese opera is an impor-
tant subject for historical research because it was, until the mid-1980s, a
prominent part of Chinese life and culture. Contrary to the idea, common
among non-Chinese, that Chinese opera is deﬁned by Beijing opera,
numerous opera genres have existed in China over the past millennium;
Beijing opera and Yue opera are relatively new genres, having originated
only in the late eighteenth and late nineteenth centuries, respectively. Opera
traditions in China have been traced back to at least the “southern opera”
(nanxi) that matured during the Southern Song dynasty (1127–1279) and
the “miscellany opera” (zaju) of the Yuan dynasty (1271–1368), and, in the
ﬁve centuries between the mid-Ming (1500s) and the last decade of the
twentieth century, local operas made up the most important form of pop-
ular entertainment for the vast majority of Chinese people.
5 While all Chi-
nese operas shared a basic artistic format combining music, singing, speech,
dance, and postures in order to narrate a story, each genre distinguished
itself mainly by the local tunes and dialect it used in singing and speech.
Theoretically, there were as many genres as there were dialects; in fact,
various ofﬁcial statistics indicate that there were more than three hundred
genres during the nineteenth and the twentieth century up to the 1980s.
6
Although Chinese operas shared a basic format and a rich repertoire
of plays, which developed and accumulated over centuries, each genre had
its own ways of rendering these plays in order to cater to local taste. For
a modern scholar trying to grasp the idea of “Chinese opera,” it is imper-
ative to note that what was most important for the artists of each genre
and their audiences was the local identity of the opera, an identity man-
ifested in the operatic rendering of the tunes, dialects, and vocabularies
that reﬂected a local population’s particular sentiments and tastes. Sung
in local dialects and tunes for the local population, local-opera and sto-
rytelling genres were the most direct and authentic expressions of the life
experiences and imaginations of the Chinese people in their various local
environments. As such, these local operas contain a great deal of infor-
Introduction    7

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===

8 Introduction
mation about local populations—their living environment, their daily strug-
gles, and their identities. As these genres also shared a common reper-
toire of plays across geographic and dialect areas and across time, they
provide ﬁrsthand materials with which to study Chinese life and culture,
both as locally and temporally speciﬁc and as a dynamic system that con-
nects the historical with the contemporary and local or regional experi-
ences with national imaginations.
Most important, the oral and performance-oriented materials of local
operas provide access to the real “popular” world outside the discursive
spaces produced by the writings of elite men and women. Most local operas
had humble origins in rural populations. While some were transformed into
more elaborate forms, such as Beijing opera and Yue opera, most remained
local, small-scale phenomena. Most local operas in the latter half of the
Qing dynasty were initially oral and performance oriented. As access to
written opera scripts was limited, and owing to the generally low rates of
literacy among peasants who became actors, performances of local operas
were based mostly on actors’ improvisations, albeit with the help of some
sketchy plot outlines and a few lines of lyrics established by famous actors.
Improvisation was such an important element of Chinese opera that, until
the 1950s, few actors followed script lyrics closely, even though by then
the literacy rate among actors had gradually risen, and scripts had been
widely available, at least in cities, for almost the entire Republican period.
Most so-called playwrights were in fact story writers whose main job was
to create the plot and main characters and who only sometimes included
a few lines of lyrics in their scripts. Actors would take these bare-bones
scripts and ﬂesh out the story onstage by adding lyrics and speeches of
their own, inspired by interactions with their stage partners and in reac-
tion to audience responses. Most scripts of popular plays published dur-
ing this period were not created by playwrights for opera troupes but were
written records of well-established performances.
Modern China’s political and intellectual leadership tended to view oral
and local traditions as barriers to the creation of a national identity. Dur-
ing the May Fourth New Culture Movement, they set off to overcome these
barriers by promoting and popularizing standard Chinese (Mandarin) as
the national spoken language and developing a new standard vernacular
literary system based on it. A new standard, Chinese-based national lan-
guage began to be established in the ensuing decades as it was used in edu-
cation, ofﬁcial communication, and the mass media. Despite these efforts,
local dialects and sentiments continued to be a major feature in Chinese

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===

Introduction    9
lives in urban centers as well as in villages and small towns, and local operas
continued to express these local sentiments.
Most Western-language monographs on Shanghai’s popular culture,
however, have focused on the petty intellectuals closely involved in the pro-
duction and consumption of popular ﬁction and ﬁlm based on standard Chi-
nese, while overlooking local-opera and storytelling genres and their
native-place supporters, who formed a large urban population characterized
by low literacy and/or low status along with a lack of interest or ability in
reading and writing. This has been the case in part because of the difﬁcul-
ties the foreign researcher faces in accessing local dialects. Chinese schol-
ars, in contrast, worked to produce histories and gazetteers of various local
operas during the 1980s and 1990s as part of state-sponsored local gazetteer
projects. Each established genre in modern Shanghai—including Yue opera,
Shanghai opera, Huai opera (Huaiju [lit., “the opera from the Huai River,”
i.e., northern Jiangsu, also known as Jiangbeixi, Subeixi]), and Beijing opera
in Shanghai—was honored with a gazetteer.
7 As the most popular opera
genre in the city and the Jiangnan region, Yue opera also became the sub-
ject of a few popular histories, including Gao Yilong’s The Story of Yue Opera
(Yueju shihua) and Ying Zhiliang’s History of Yue Opera in China (Zhongguo
Yueju fazhan shi).
8 Yet these publications have not received adequate atten-
tion from historians, partially because these works focus on operatic devel-
opments instead of considering the social and political signiﬁcance of the
genres in the history of modern Shanghai.
9
Focusing on Yue opera and drawing on other local-opera forms, the fol-
lowing chapters show that, in twentieth-century Shanghai, dynamic native-
place and linguistic politics were basic elements in the daily lives of millions
of new residents, and the status of various local operas was closely related
to the status of their native-place patrons. Even with the current dominance
of standard Chinese in the mass media and the educational system, most
people still speak local dialects within their family and native-place groups,
and native-place politics continues to play an important role in people’s
lives. In fact, most Shanghai women interviewed for this project could not
speak standard Chinese (though they could understand it) let alone use it
to communicate subtle and complex feelings.
10
Urban Space
The story of Yue opera and its women must also be a story about the
 modern city of Shanghai. Two factors formed the backdrop for the dra-

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===

10 Introduction
matic rise of Yue opera. First, women’s Yue opera was part of the city’s
dynamic popular culture, shaped during the formation of Shanghai’s cap-
italist economy and bourgeois population, a modern transformation that
occurred ﬁrst and foremost in Shanghai. Second, one salient feature of
the city’s popular culture was its obsession with women and love, a response
to fundamental changes in gender ideologies and gender relations that,
while taking place nationwide, were felt most intensely in the modern
metropolis.
Shanghai, the largest semicolonial treaty-port city in China, was not
only a physical place deﬁned by its ports of call and complicated political
jurisdictions; it also fueled China’s modern transformation under Western
inﬂuence. Shanghai is located at the mouth of the Yangzi River delta, backed
by one of traditional China’s richest areas, which is also noted for its cul-
tural vitality, and facing the East China Sea, beachhead of the West’s impact
on China. Owing largely to its location, Shanghai developed rapidly into
a regional and national center of the nation’s modern economy and gained
renown for its hybrid cosmopolitan atmosphere. 
Colonial Shanghai provided a safe haven for economic development,
as foreign powers sheltered China’s most modern sectors and wealthiest
industrialists from political disturbances and civil wars, and the city quickly
grew into the largest industrial and commercial center in China.
11 In more
concrete terms, modern Shanghai was built by large numbers of domestic
migrants, who formed the largest share of the city’s population. Shanghai
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had already become
the largest city in China, and the foreign settlements comprised its most
economically and culturally vibrant sectors. By 1935, Shanghai’s popula-
tion reached 3.6 million, of which approximately 1.6 million lived in for-
eign settlements, alongside about 60,000 foreigners.
12 The population in
foreign settlements continued to grow, to 1.67 million by 1936, and then
exploded, to 4.5 million in 1938, with the inﬂux of refugees ﬂeeing invad-
ing Japanese troops.
13
The combination of the foregoing factors—ambiguous political sover-
eignty, a lack of ideological control, a high concentration in resources, and
the rapid growth of a diverse population—produced a dynamic market for
all kinds of cultural products, native and foreign, traditional and modern.
Skyscrapers were erected along the Bund and Nanjing Road to house banks,
customs ofﬁces, and department stores where imported luxury goods were
displayed, showcasing the city’s modernity. A few streets away in the nar-
row lanes along Fuzhou Road, brothels and opium dens prospered along-

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===

Introduction    11
side publishing houses, bookstores, printing services, and newspaper head-
quarters. Because it combined modern and traditional as well as native and
foreign cultural forms, Shanghai captured the imaginations of both Chinese
and foreigners. Their image of Shanghai was captured in turn by a distinc-
tive urban popular culture manufactured by artists who availed themselves
of the city’s ﬂourishing print industry and numerous entertainment venues. 
Republican-era Shanghai manufactured modern romances in print. Ever
since the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) , the Jiangnan area had been home
to China’s most advanced printing industry, with the cities of Nanjing,
Suzhou, and Hangzhou leading the way. Shanghai’s printers built on this
Jiangnan tradition by incorporating Western machinery and paper, and they
soon became the nation’s leading force in modernizing China’s print cul-
ture. Shanghai’s printing industry was the backbone of the city’s commercial
culture and helped shape cultural trends ranging from clothing fashions
like the “cheongsam” (qipao), a modern urban dress for women, to the pop-
ular “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies” ﬁction.
14 Shanghai’s printing indus-
try was as capable of producing large numbers of inexpensive books in a
short period of time as it was of producing reﬁned prints. This capacity
proved indispensable for the manufacturing of popular literature and gave
Shanghai’s popular literature its physical form. As the literary scholar Zhang
Gansheng has pointed out, the great expansion of popular literature began
with the appearance of daily newspapers with literary supplements in the
early Republican period.
15 These literary supplements, with daily install-
ments of serialized ﬁction, were soon rivaled by literary magazines, which
published weekly, three times a month, semimonthly, and monthly and
featured as many as a dozen ﬁctional works in a given issue, often includ-
ing three or four installments of longer works. If a series proved popular,
an offprint would soon be produced. While the format of serialized ﬁction
built on traditional links between storytelling and storytelling-style liter-
ature, it also made the mass consumption of ﬁction possible.
16 Popular ﬁction
soon became an important part of everyday life for many Shanghai resi-
dents. As Zhou Shoujuan, the famous “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies”
ﬁction author and editor of many popular literary supplements and mag-
azines, including Saturday (Libai liu), recalled in his later years:
There were not that many magazines in the early Republican period, so Sat-
urday was very popular at that time. Every Saturday morning, readers waited
at the door of the Zhonghua Library, where Saturday was distributed. As
soon as the door opened, people rushed in to be the ﬁrst to buy the maga-

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===

12 Introduction
zine. The situation somewhat resembled the morning rush for pancakes and
deep-fried dough sticks at the neighborhood restaurants.17
People from all over the country ﬂowed into the metropolis, attracted
by its promise of opportunity, dazzled by its prosperity, amazed by its open-
ness and sophistication, and frustrated by its coldheartedness and decep-
tion. Perhaps because they lived in such a legendary place, Shanghai people
liked legendary stories. The best-selling writer Zhang Ailing, who began
her career as a Shanghai writer in the early 1940s, titled her ﬁrst collec-
tion of short stories Legendary Stories (Chuanqi). Commenting on the char-
acteristics of Shanghai people, she wrote: “Shanghainese are abnormal
products made of traditional Chinese people tempered by the high pres-
sure of modern life and experienced in complex interactions among all kinds
of old and new cultures. The result may not be so healthy, but there is a
marvelous wisdom in it.”
18
These immigrants also carried with them their native-place identities,
habits, and cultures. The largest immigrant groups, including those from
Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Guangdong, deployed their native cultures as they
competed for recognition in Shanghai’s public spaces; native opera houses
as well as regional restaurants, grocery stores, and native-place halls
became marks of their claims to cultural signiﬁcance. Major native theaters
in Shanghai included Yue opera from Guangdong (which used the same
pronunciation as Yue opera from Zhejiang but was written with a differ-
ent character), “Suzhou story-singing” (pingtan), Huai opera from northern
Jiangsu, Yue opera from Zhejiang, Shanghai opera from the nearby coun-
tryside, and “Shanghai-style Beijing opera” (Haipai Jingju). While ﬁrst-rate
Beijing opera troupes performed in high-class teahouses and theaters in the
foreign settlements during the early twentieth century, and major Yue (Zhe-
jiang) opera companies relocated to upper-tier theaters when Yue opera
became popular in the 1940s, other minor operas continued to be performed
mostly on the peripheries of the downtown areas, where their constituen-
cies were concentrated. Jiangbei opera, for example, was performed mainly
in small, shoddy theaters in working-class neighborhoods in Yangshupu or
in the shantytowns of Zhabei for lower-class northern Jiangsu immigrants,
while Shanghai opera was performed mainly in Nanshi, Huxi (western
Shanghai), and Pudong (across the Huangpu River) for a mixed lower- to
lower-middle-class local audience.
19
Although the historical kinship between popular theatrical entertain-
ment and popular literature is well known to modern scholars, it is worth

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===

Introduction    13
noting that a dynamic intertextuality between the two media created a sym-
biosis of popular culture in Republican era Shanghai. Virtually every pop-
ular novel published in Shanghai was adapted for popular theaters and
storytelling genres as well as for the cinema.
20 Moreover, intertextuality
went in both directions, for not only did local operas and storytelling ven-
ues compete to stage popular ﬁction works but writers also rewrote pop-
ular opera plays and Suzhou story-singing pieces as ﬁction.
21 Zhang
Henshui’s Fate in Tears and Laughter (Tixiao yinyuan) is one of the most
remarkable examples of this intertextuality. Zhang’s novel ﬁrst appeared
in daily installments, from November 1929 to 1931, in Joyful Forest (Kuai-
huolin), a literary supplement to the major newspaper Daily News (Xinwen
bao). A complete offprint ﬁrst appeared in 1932. The novel was extremely
popular in Shanghai and was quickly adapted to many forms of enter-
tainment. An article published in Coral (Shanhu) magazine in May 1933
documented this phenomenon: 
Since Zhang Henshui published his novel Fate in Tears and Laughter, the novel
has been used as a blueprint for various forms of entertainment, such as ﬁlm,
storytelling, Beijing opera, Guangdong opera, new drama [xinju],22 Western
opera, comic shows, puppet shows, Shaoxing opera [Yue opera], open ground
operas, comic books, and folk songs. At the same time, several “sequels” and
“alternative endings” have appeared on the market....  T h e r e  a r e  t h r e e  v e r -
sions of Fate in Tears and Laughter in Suzhou Story-Singing (Tixiao yinyuan tanci)
being broadcast on Shanghai’s radio stations, scripted by Yao Min’ai, Qi
Fanniu, and Lu Dan’an, respectively.
23
This intertextuality among various forms of popular literature and entertain -
ment contributed to a diverse yet interconnected popular culture, organized
by the marketplace and reﬂective of a distinctly Shanghainese sensibility. 
One salient characteristic of this Shanghainese sensibility was its obses-
sion with women and love stories. As the literary historian Yang Yi
remarked about Shanghai-style, or Haipai, literature, referring to several
generations of Shanghai writers from Bao Tianxiao to Zhang Ailing: 
Yanqing [elaborating on feelings] was the largest genre of Haipai literature.
It seems no work could claim to be Haipai if it did not elaborate on the
question of love. They [Haipai writers] especially appreciated the tears of
Venus, and so their love stories were always sentimental....  T h e  narrow-
ness of the theme made it easy for Haipai writers to fall into the trap of

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===

14 Introduction
scholar-beauty boilerplate, but once they rose above such hackneyed for-
mulations, they could gain some insight into the mystery of sex and love
between men and women.
24
Regardless of its bias against “scholar-beauty boilerplate,” Yang Yi’s com-
ment nonetheless aptly describes the orientation of Shanghai’s popular
entertainment and, indeed, Shanghai-style popular culture as a whole. The
genre of love melodrama dominated literature, ﬁlm, drama, opera, story-
telling, and radio broadcasting. The prevalence of love dramas may be
understood as a cultural convergence in modern Shanghai between the yan-
qing genre of the East and the melodrama of the West.
The cultural historian Paul Pickowicz explained the origins of the genre
of melodrama as it ﬁrst emerged in industrial Europe: 
Melodrama, as Peter Brooks and others have suggested, is characterized by
rhetorical excess, extravagant representation, and intensity of moral claim.
It is an aesthetic mode of “heightened dramatization” that refers to pure and
polar concepts of darkness and light, salvation and damnation. The melo-
dramatic genre was developed ﬁrst in French theater in the immediate after-
math of the revolution, at a time when a signiﬁcant post-revolutionary
democratization of culture was taking place. Although melodrama is a dis-
tinctively modern form, its initial political thrust was conservative. The audi-
ence for melodrama included people from all social classes who were
frightened and confused by the modern transformation of society. This new
and powerful mode of representation had a major impact on European ﬁction
in the mid- and late nineteenth century and has been kept alive by ﬁlmmakers
and television producers in the twentieth century.
25
The melodramatic genre, as Pickowicz has also pointed out, dominated
the Shanghai-based Republican era ﬁlm industry. Despite their efforts to
infuse Chinese ﬁlms with May Fourth thought in the 1930s, leftist ﬁlm-
makers such as Sun Yu, Cai Chusheng, Wu Yonggang, Shen Xiling, and
Xia Yan all became captives of the powerful melodrama format. Although
Xia Yan and PRC ﬁlm scholars claimed that 1930s ﬁlms embodied the tenets
of social realism, leftist ﬁlmmakers in the 1930s, as Pickowicz argued,
“accepted without question the dominance of the melodramatic genre and
thereby doomed to failure any chance they had to introduce complex May
Fourth ideas.”
26
Perry Link, in his pioneering study of early Republican era popular lit-

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===

Introduction    15
erature, put forth a similar interpretation of the “mandarin ducks and but-
terﬂies” school of ﬁction, albeit without using the word “melodrama.” He
pointed out that various aspects of the historical setting and literary char-
acteristics of “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies” ﬁction resemble those of pop-
ular literature in other industrializing and industrialized societies: 
The extent to which modern life patterns are inherent consequences of indus-
trialism may not be entirely clear; but modern-style entertainment ﬁction (or
television, in recent decades) has, for one example, consistently appeared in
tandem with industrialism around the world. From its beginnings in eighteenth-
century England this kind of ﬁction spread to Western Europe and America,
in many cases through direct borrowing as stories were reprinted or trans-
lated across international boundaries.
27
The genre of melodrama as summarized by Pickowicz, or that of pop u-
lar ﬁction as deﬁned by Link, was introduced to Shanghai in the early
twentieth century via Japanese translations of Western ﬁction being mass-
produced in Osaka.
28 It is of course no coincidence that Osaka and Shang-
hai, the foremost industrial cities of Japan and China, respectively, were
the national centers of melodramatic productions. 
Despite the fact that the development of the melodrama in China, Japan,
and the West were all related to the process of industrialization and urban-
ization, the Chinese perception of this process, which shaped a Chinese
version of the melodrama, was in many ways not the same. While the English
word “melodrama” has no easy counterpart in Chinese, the two popularly
used native terms, chuanqi and yanqing, capture much of the peculiarity of
popular culture in Republican Shanghai.
First, the Chinese were not just “frightened and confused” by modern
changes, as Pickowicz suggested of their Western counterparts, with
regard to their uncertain future. For Chinese of the time, “modern,” a term
applied mostly to things Western, was a known quantity, and for many,
modern things were both necessary and fascinating: necessary because
China had to become modernized in order to save itself from foreign dom-
inance, and fascinating because of the novelty and exotic origins of these
things. Indeed, many welcomed the coming of the modern age with feel-
ings of wonder and excitement, favorably impressed by the steamboats,
trains and railways, telegrams, and skyscrapers as well as by the foreign
gunboats and powerful riﬂes that threatened China’s sovereignty. This sense
of excitement and wonder toward modernity is captured in the native phrase

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===

16 Introduction
chuanqi, which means “romance,” “legend,” or “strange story.” 29 Although
the term originated to refer to a genre of ﬁction that was popular during
the Tang dynasty (618–907), and later also was associated with a genre of
Ming drama, it had also been used liberally to refer to ﬁction that recounted
legendary or bizarre happenings. It thus struck Chinese of this period as
appropriate for describing the wonder of Shanghai in the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century.
Second, the most common form of melodrama in Republican Shanghai
was the love story. The Chinese term yanqing probably comes closest to
describing the content and style of the city’s popular culture. Yanqing, as a
genre of literature and entertainment, is characterized largely by a thematic
focus on love relationships and a mode of aesthetics involving complicated
plots and exceedingly sentimental expressions of emotions. Yanqingauthors
rarely exhibited much interest in politics in their work, and any political
topic on which they touched for narrative purposes never interfered with
their principal concern, the poetics of qing, or feelings. While some yan-
qing stories, like those related to mundane relationships among friends and
siblings or between parents and children, do deal with the full range of
human emotions, the majority focuses on love. 
Yanqing literature and entertainment of this period also had deep his-
torical and regional roots. Love stories in China can be traced back to at
least the Tang dynasty, when they were a subgenre of chuanqi and there-
fore consisted of tales of unusual events. Yanqing arts emerged as an inde-
pendent genre only in the seventeenth century, a period during which
the Taizhou School, which argued for gender equality and intellectual-
spiritual companionship, became inﬂuential in literary circles.
30 In the wake
of the bloody Manchu conquest in the mid-seventeenth century, yanqing
themes dominated literary and theatrical production in the highly com-
mercialized urban areas of Jiangnan. Seventeenth-century scholar-beauty
ﬁction and such famous chuanqi plays as Hong Shen’s The Hall of Eternity
(Changsheng dian) all focus on love.
31
The Republican era ﬁxation on yanqingsignals one of the most  far-reaching
and deeply felt changes in twentieth-century China: the social and ide-
ological remaking of the family and the redeﬁning of gender relations.
Concomitant with the May Fourth rhetoric of free love and marriage and
gender equality were changes in family structure, most notably among
immigrant families in large urban centers. The new urban settlers largely
abandoned the traditional model of the multigenerational household and
established nuclear families centered on an adult couple with children.
32

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===

Introduction    17
Polygamy, another feature of traditional family structure for elite fami-
lies, was discouraged by emerging Republican social norms and, albeit
with exceptions, middle- and upper-middle-class men kept their second
(and sometimes third) wives in locations separate from the main house-
hold. The relationship between husband and wife therefore became
increasingly important within the family. As young people began to
explore new ways of ﬁnding a dream husband or wife, courtship between
young men and women became a common, although still shocking, fea-
ture of Shanghai’s public life. The spectacular nature of Haipai courtship
was captured in an article published in the October 1939 issue of the pop-
ular magazine Shanghai Life (Shanghai shenghuo), which quoted a war
refugee who had only recently come to Shanghai after ﬂeeing invading
Japanese troops: 
Somebody who had not been to Shanghai would have no way of knowing
that relationships between men and women could be so close. Every time I
go to the park, I see that most people there are couples. One man and one
woman closely accompany each other, and they interact only with each other:
one is a gorgeously dressed new woman with hanging long hair, a powdered
face, red lips, [clad] in stockings and high-heeled leather shoes, and the other
is a smartly coiffed and creamy-faced young man wearing a Western suit.
As they stroll along, they laugh freely, holding arms or leaning close to each
other, as if they are the only ones there. In the hinterland, such behavior
would surely cause gossip and be considered shameless.
33
This degree of public intimacy between a young man and a woman may
not have been typical of ordinary Shanghai residents, but its shocking effect
on people is no exaggeration. 
The need to reﬂect on changing family and gender relations was also
manifested in elite arts, as seen, for example, in Lu Xun’s short story
“Remembrances of the Past” (Shangshi) and numerous spoken drama ren-
ditions of Henrik Ibsen’s play A Doll’s House. However, the most popular
pieces of elite spoken drama in the 1930s—including Cao Yu’s Thunder-
storm (Leiyu), set in a modern coal mine, and Sunrise (Richu), which took
place in a menacing metropolis (Shanghai)—were quintessential love melo-
dramas, structured by the trials and tribulations of romantic relationships
and intensely focused on the conﬂict between good and evil.
34 Indeed, the
struggle between good and evil became even more intense in the leftist
ﬁlms and spoken dramas that aimed for an ideological or moral transfor-

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===

18 Introduction
mation of the audience, compared to the more market-oriented popular-
culture productions. Ironically, intellectuals also participated in creating
the phenomenon of the love drama, by using the genre to showcase core
leftist values and criticisms, framed in a set of dichotomies such as good
versus evil, modern versus feudal, national pride versus foreign invasion,
the working people versus the ruling class, women versus the feudal, patri-
archal system, and the unspoiled native countryside versus the decadent,
foreign urban center.
As Shanghai’s economic, social, and demographic development in the
mid-twentieth century created a fertile breeding ground for modern love
dramas, women’s Yue opera emerged as a master theater of this genre. West-
ern observers tend to view Yue opera, or any Chinese native opera, as tra-
ditional theater and see ﬁlm as the modern form. For many Chinese familiar
with native operas, however, women’s Yue opera was young compared to
operas such as “Kun opera” (Kunqu)—opera from Kunshan, Jiangsu—and
Beijing opera, which were hundreds of years old. Its aesthetics were mod-
ern, as it was inﬂuenced by ﬁlm and spoken drama and acquired a modern
cosmopolitan quality. As the love drama reﬁned its modern aesthetics,
women’s Yue opera became the leading type of theater in Shanghai. In fact,
several theatrical genres active in Shanghai—such as Yue opera, Shanghai
opera, and Huai opera—were new forms of Chinese opera, while imported
spoken drama and ﬁlm were not necessarily newer. Film, for example,
became established in Shanghai during roughly the same period, and its
popular success, beginning in the mid-1930s, owed much to the develop-
ment of the cinematic love drama. Women’s opera in Shanghai achieved
popular success beginning in the late 1930s, after the ﬁlm boom. Note that
while most theatrical performances were carried out in various local dialects
and tended to have separate audiences among dialect-based groups, ﬁlm
dialogue used mostly standard Chinese and drew a large crowd of the young
and educated that cut across native and dialect origins. The growing pop-
ularity of ﬁlm, however, did not deplete the audience for dialect-based the-
aters in any signiﬁcant way, and many people enjoyed both the cinema
and their favorite opera, just as they were capable of comprehending both
standard Chinese and their local languages. 
Wartime Shanghai
The years 1937–45, during the War of Resistance against Japan, represent
a crucial period in women’s Yue opera history. During these years, the

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===

Introduction    19
genre took root in Shanghai and became a dominant presence in the city’s
popular entertainment. The opera matured rapidly, and the foundations
laid during this period ensured its further development in the postwar and
Civil War (1945–49) periods. These twelve years before the end of the
Republican era, in 1949, witnessed the establishment of women’s Yue opera
as a major modern art form in Shanghai. The following statistics illustrate
the dramatic rise of women’s Yue opera in wartime Shanghai and afterward.
Among Shanghai’s theaters in 1938, two were devoted to spoken drama,
three to Shanghai opera, and one to Kun opera; only Beijing opera’s twelve
stages competed with the twelve dedicated to women’s Yue opera.
35 The
popularity of women’s Yue opera continued to increase throughout the
1940s and eventually overtook that of Beijing opera to become the most
popular theater in Shanghai. A 1947 tourist guidebook lists thirty-two the-
aters for women’s Yue opera, compared to only six Beijing opera houses,
six theaters for Shanghai opera, ﬁve for spoken drama, and four for comic
shows plus thirty-four movie theaters.
36
What was the relationship between the Yue opera boom and the con-
ditions of wartime Shanghai? Was the success of Yue opera somehow a con-
sequence of war and occupation? Or was the rise of Yue opera only a
coincidence? 
The Japanese occupation of Shanghai began in November 1937, in the
wake of the three-month-long Battle of Shanghai. As Chinese troops
retreated, Japanese forces took control of most of the city, leaving only
the French concession and the largely Anglo-American International Set-
tlement intact, making this area a “solitary island” ( gudao), until the out-
break of the Paciﬁc War on December 8, 1941. As the Japanese advanced
into the hinterland, refugees ﬂooded into this “island” from neighboring
areas, contributing to the considerable wartime prosperity of “island”
Shanghai. Various local operas—such as Jiangbei opera, Yangzhou opera,
and Yue opera—thrived as performers from the surrounding area arrived
in the city and continued to entertain their fellow provincials, who were
swelling the city’s population.
37 Many female Yue opera troupes, entering
the city with large number of Zhejiang refugees, ﬂourished in Shanghai
during this unusual period. Yue opera continued to develop even when the
population began to decrease after 1942, when the Japanese completed their
occupation of the city and began to deport refugees back to the country-
side in an effort to strengthen their control over the local population and
reduce pressure from the worsening food shortage.
38
Wartime politics were also favorable for Yue opera and popular-

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===

20 Introduction
entertainment genres in general. Previously, in the face of the escalating
Japanese invasion of China during the 1930s, an intellectual-led “resistance
culture” (kangzhan wenhua) mounted in the public sphere and  reached its
height after the outbreak of the War of Resistance in July 1937 .
39 In Shang-
hai, however, resistance culture began to wane toward the end of the decade.
As Chinese troops and the national government withdrew deeper into the
hinterland, and as European authorities in charge of “island” Shanghai were
under increasing Japanese pressure to crack down on resistance culture, intel-
lectuals and young patriots gradually left Shanghai for Wuhan, Chong -
qing, Guilin, Kunming, and Yan’an. The elite resistance culture disappeared
from the scene entirely after Japanese forces completed their occupation
of Shanghai at the end of 1941.
40 In the meantime, much to the disgust of
intellectuals and political leaders, popular culture remained active. 
The occupation authority favored popular culture over the more nation-
alistic, elite culture. It carefully censored intellectual institutions, includ-
ing major newspapers, the publishing industry, spoken drama venues, and
the ﬁlm industry, to suppress the circulation of resistance propaganda.
41
Among their ﬁrst acts upon entering “island” Shanghai, Japanese forces took
over major newspapers and publishing houses.
42 They then proceeded to
arrest, interrogate, and torture nationalistic and left-wing intellectuals. 43
While the occupation authority placed intellectual activities under tight
surveillance and ruthlessly suppressed any hint of resistance, it deliberately
left all forms of popular entertainment alone, as these were deemed apo-
litical and therefore not a threat. Indeed, the occupation authority made a
systematic effort to boost popular entertainment in order to create a false
appearance of peace and prosperity in occupied Shanghai. It tried, for exam-
ple, though without success, to persuade Mei Lanfang, who had lived qui-
etly in Shanghai since the fall of Hong Kong, to return to the stage.
44 The
occupation authority also banned Hollywood movies while encouraging
Wang Jingwei’s collaboration government to take over the city’s ﬁlm indus-
try and produce ﬁlms centered on love stories.
45
The occupation authority’s cultural policy also had a profound impact
on literary productions in wartime Shanghai. Writers could no longer frame
their stories as nationalistic, anti-Japanese narratives, which many had con-
sidered their patriotic duty in the 1930s, but they were unwilling to endorse
the Japanese rhetoric of the so-called Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity
Sphere, which subordinated China to Japan’s imperial ambitions. Con-
sequently, the ostensibly innocuous and personal topics of love, marriage,
and family, or of modern metropolitan life in general, became favorite

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===

Introduction    21
themes. Some seasoned romantic-ﬁction writers, now long-term Shanghai
residents, who had been dormant during the height of resistance culture,
became active again on the literary scene. Zhou Shoujuan, for example,
resumed the famous romantic-ﬁction magazine The Violet (Ziluolan) in 1943,
and Chen Dieyi published Phenomena (Wanxiang) and, later, Chatting in Wind
and Rain (Fengyu tan).
The censorship of patriotic themes pushed wartime writers to concen-
trate on aspects of China’s experience with modernity on a more personal,
and hence more universal, level, even as their environment was being shaped
by an oppressive foreign occupation. A saddened sensibility that spoke of
Shanghai residents’ ambivalent experience with urban modernity and for-
eign occupation thus prevailed in wartime literature. Like the city itself,
the residents of wartime Shanghai were captives who had no choice but
to live their everyday lives in an occupied city. Consequently, they were
tied to the city more than ever before, and their identity as Shanghainese,
as opposed to that of accidental sojourners, became ever stronger. This new
awareness of and identiﬁcation with the city are evident in the dozens of
literary magazines that published explorations of the experience of  modern
life between 1942 and 1945.
46 In the absence of a cultural elite, popular-
ﬁction writers enjoyed the status of cultural celebrities, and wartime pop-
ular culture became centered on personal narratives and sentimental love
stories, the very specialty of popular opera genres such as Yue opera.
47
The rise of women’s voices in wartime Shanghai was particularly beneﬁ-
cial to the development of women’s Yue opera. The occupation authority’s
suppression of elite resistance rhetoric also set the stage for women’s voices
to be heard clearly and distinctly. Moreover, Japanese authorities willingly
supported the rhetoric of women’s liberation as a way of promoting Japan’s
modernist outlook and ﬁnding common ground with Chinese intellectuals,
and “women’s questions” (funü wenti) became one of the very few politically
meaningful topics that could be freely discussed in the print media in wartime
Shanghai. Unlike the periods before and after the occupation, this period
witnessed women themselves, not a patriarchal government or a male intel-
lectual elite, initiating and setting topics for public discussion and assuming
authority in leading the discourse. A new generation of “young lady writ-
ers” (xiaojie zuojia) emerged, and it is important to note that the period’s
most popular writers include two young women, Su Qing and Zhang
 Ailing.
48 These women were less concerned with the abstract principles of
women’s rights than with the mundane concerns of a wide range of women—
professionals, working women in general, housewives, and students. 

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===

22 Introduction
In “About My Writing” (Ziji de wenzhang), Su Qing observed, “I write
mostly about relations between men and women. That’s my life. I cannot
help it.”49 Zhang Ailing also remarked, at a well-publicized women authors’
roundtable: “Women act in a limited social sphere, and we cannot do much
about this....W o m e n  w riters write mostly about family and love; their
style is softer, naive, exotic, sentimental, and sensible, which has to do with
each writer’s environment, education, and personality.”
50 During the round-
table discussion, most young lady writers admitted that their works were
based on personal experiences. While Zhang Ailing claimed that her sto-
ries were derived not necessarily from her personal life but more from obser-
vation and imagination, these stories nonetheless focus on personal
odysseys, the family, and love relationships. It is not surprising that these
women artists would consider their focus on love, marriage, and the fam-
ily to be “natural,” given the long-standing gender system that deﬁned
women as subordinate to men and having no role to play beyond the domes-
tic sphere, a system still very much a reality despite the efforts of its chal-
lengers during the Republican period.
51
Women writers’ prominent position in wartime Shanghai and their public
discussion of women’s issues provided an important context for the growth
of women’s Yue opera and its exploration of love, the family, and gender
relations from a woman’s perspective; however, there are also some speciﬁc
historical connections between women writers and women’s Yue opera.
Zhang Ailing was so amazed by a Yue opera show she attended in rural Zhe-
jiang that she wrote an essay recounting the experience.
52 Based on vari-
ous remarks about Yue opera in her writing, it is apparent that Su Qing, a
native of Ningbo, attended Yue opera shows from time to time with her
mother and relatives. She obviously enjoyed the opera and, in the early
1950s, became a professional Yue opera playwright.
53
Thus, while the inﬂux of large numbers of war refugees, many of whom
were wealthy and had both the time and the money to go to the theater
and buy popular ﬁction, stimulated an initial popular-culture boom in “island”
Shanghai, wartime politics and the emergence of women’s culture in gen-
eral helped sustain women’s Yue opera and other popular-culture forms in
occupied Shanghai. But, for several reasons, wartime Shanghai was ulti-
mately a rupture only in political and military terms, not in terms of fun-
damental cultural and social development in urban life. 
First, contrary to what scholars have generally assumed, the wartime
 popular-culture boom in Shanghai was not an “abnormal” ( jixing) pheno -
menon but a normal phenomenon reasserting itself during an unusual period.

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===

Introduction    23
Popular culture was in fact the mainstay of Shanghai’s cultural market
throughout the Republican period, while elite arts, though a powerful cul-
tural presence, were popular only for a short period in the late 1930s, an
“abnormal” period when the resistance culture ran high. 
Second, the rise of women’s voices in wartime Shanghai was a result of
continuous efforts to integrate women into society since the 1911 Repub-
lican Revolution. Like the young actresses in women’s Yue opera, Zhang
Ailing and her cohorts were born during the May Fourth era, roughly 1915–
23, and were in their early twenties; Su Qing, born in 1914, was only slightly
older than the rest. If wartime circumstances made these women the cen-
ter of attention in public culture in occupied Shanghai, the preceding three
decades of work on women’s education, women’s right to work, and equal
rights for women laid the groundwork for this development. Professional
women, including salesgirls in department stores, nurses, and school-
teachers, became a signiﬁcant part of the city’s workforce, and their expe-
riences and problems were shared and articulated by women writers.
54 Su
Qing had been an English major at the Central University in Nanjing, while
Zhang Ailing attended St. Mary’s, a Catholic women’s school in Shang-
hai, and St. John’s College. These young authors belonged to a generation
that grew up under the mixed inﬂuence of the New Culture, popular roman-
tic ﬁction, and Western literature. Of writing, Zhang said: “I have experi-
mented with different styles of ﬁction writing, including storytelling
literature [huaben] of the late Ming, as collected in Legends of the Past and the
Present [Jingu qiguan],
55 historical romance, miscellaneous notes, ‘mandarin
ducks and butterﬂies’ ﬁction, and orthodox New Literature [Xin Wenxue].”56
Stylistic experimentation aside, Zhang Ailing and her generation of women
writers had grown up with the rhetoric of women’s liberation and witnessed
the difﬁculties of, and progress toward, achieving that goal, and they now
began to explore women’s issues and experiences in the modern metropo-
lis from perspectives that were both personal and representative of those
held by the city’s new professional women.
57
Third, the inﬂux of war refugees may be viewed as one of the many waves
of migration to the great treaty-port city since the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury. Yue opera’s establishment in Shanghai was indeed a cultural ramiﬁ-
cation of Zhejiang natives’ massive migration to Shanghai, a long-term
process that encompassed the wartime period. Thus, while war and occu-
pation were not crucial in the development of women’s Yue opera, it was
crucial that they did not alter the dynamics of these developments in urban
migration, urban popular culture, and women’s integration into society,

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===

which underlay the formation of such a women’s culture. The rapid trans-
formation of women’s Yue opera into the most popular theater in wartime
Shanghai was, therefore, a ripening of these longer-term historical processes
that ran through the entire Republican period. The politics of occupation,
however, helped push a popular phenomenon, which might otherwise have
been overlooked, to the forefront of the cultural scene. 
The Story Unfolds
A group of recent works map out the social and cultural contexts within
which women’s Yue opera evolved. The people featured in this volume gen-
erally lived in crowded townhouses along Shanghai’s narrow lanes; their
living environment has been discussed in Hanchao Lu’s Beyond the Neon Lights.
The actresses were, generally speaking, a lucky group of women who man-
aged to obtain full citizenship in the nation’s modern transformation while
their traditional “sisters,” the prostitutes, were denigrated as a social ill to
be eliminated by the same process, as described by Gail Hershatter in Dan-
gerous Pleasures and Christian Henriot in Prostitution and Sexuality in Shanghai.
Susan Mann’s article, “The Cult of Domesticity in Republican Shanghai’s
Middle Class,” which examines Shanghai housewives from Ningbo, and
Emily Honig’s Sisters and Strangers, a study of Shanghai’s female cotton-mill
workers, are helpful for understanding the Yue opera audience, while Bryna
Goodman’s Native Place, City, and Nation and Emily Honig’s Creating Chinese
Ethnicity help us to place the city’s popular entertainment in the background
of native-place politics. Frederic Wakeman Jr.’s excursion into the world
of police operations, Policing Shanghai, provides a social and judicial back-
ground for understanding actresses’ relationships with various social ele-
ments, including local strongmen and gangsters. In Shanghai Modern, Leo
Lee details Shanghai’s popular culture, and Andrew Jones, in Yellow Music,
describes a jazz scene. Both were dominated by male artists and consumers,
providing a contrast to the social and poetic world of women’s opera. Eliz-
abeth Perry’s study of Shanghai’s working class provides another useful con-
trast to the lives of the women of Yue opera.
58
Chapters 1 through 5 of this volume are arranged chronologically. Chap-
ter 1 traces the development of the opera from its origins in Shengxian’s
countryside in the late nineteenth century to its establishment in Shang-
hai in the 1930s and discusses the opera’s twofold transformation, from rural
to urban and from male to female. Chapters 2 through 4 examine the rise
of a women’s culture in Shanghai’s public space in the middle decades of
24 Introduction

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===

the twentieth century, focusing on the challenges Yue opera actresses faced
and their efforts to overcome them, female patrons and patronage, and the
re-making of lowly female entertainers into art workers and public icons
in the city’s mass media. Chapter 5 traces the vicissitudes of the opera and
actresses into the PRC period, analyzing their complex relationship with
the communist revolution and the PRC state. Chapter 6, the ﬁnal, thematic
chapter, explores the distinctly feminine aesthetics and narrative schemes
embedded in Yue opera masterpieces, which inﬂuenced popular senses of
and sensibilities toward love and gender relations in modern China. 
Introduction    25

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===

Chapter 1
The Origins of Yue Opera
Yue opera originated with a peasant form of story-singing in the Zhejiang
countryside in the mid-nineteenth century. In the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, this form underwent great transformations and was a
popular urban spectacle in Shanghai by the end of the 1930s. Signiﬁcantly,
the latter phase of the opera’s early development overlapped with the rise
of women’s Yue opera, as “all-female troupes” (nü ban) gradually replaced
traditional “all-male troupes” (nan ban). While all-male troupes largely dis-
appeared by the end of the 1930s, a gender-straight troupe (in which men
play men’s roles and women play women’s roles) appeared in the Com-
munist guerrilla area of Siming Mountain (Siming Shan) in eastern  Zhejiang
during the War of Resistance against Japan (1937–45), representing an insig -
nificant variation of Yue opera. Women’s Yue opera has since become the
mainstay and the most distinctive feature of the genre. 
The double transformation in the early development of Yue opera—from
rural to urban and from all male to all female—took place amid dynamic
tensions between Zhejiang’s countryside and the emerging treaty-port city
of Shanghai. These changes also occurred in the context of social, politi-
cal, and economic upheavals brought about by the 1911 Republican  Revolu -
tion, which terminated China’s long imperial history, and the May Fourth
New Culture Movement, which advocated adoption of a wide range of
Western ideas, such as science, democracy, and women’s liberation. These
economic, political, social, and cultural upheavals generated a popular-
culture phenomenon—the rise of folk operas throughout the country in
the early twentieth century and the consequent feminization of opera
 culture, of which Yue opera is only one, but distinct, example. 
26


=== PDF PAGE 48 ===

Beijing Opera and the Male-Centered Opera Culture of the Qing Dynasty
In order to understand the historical signiﬁcance of the rise of this mod-
ern feminine opera, it is necessary ﬁrst to historicize its predecessor, Bei-
jing opera, and the male-centered opera culture it represented. Beijing opera
has been commonly understood as the standard Chinese opera, and its all-
male cast is considered typical of this peculiarly traditional cultural form.
Studies of Chinese opera in general and Beijing opera in particular have
often overlooked the fact that Beijing opera developed into an all-male the-
ater in order to serve a predominantly male audience only during the sec-
ond half of the Qing dynasty, and that its homo-social character represented
a rupture from the hetero-social opera culture of the seventeenth century.
The most popular opera form during the late Ming (1368–1644) and
early Qing (1644–1911) dynasties was a genre known as chuanqi, which lit-
erally means “romance,” “legend,” or “bizarre story.” Like some other liter-
ary forms of the time, chuanqi celebrated the cult of qing, meaning “feelings”
or “passion,” and featured romantic stories about talented scholars and faith-
ful beauties.
1 The conquering Qing state, however, deemed the late Ming
indulgence in sentimental love stories decadent and a cause of the fall of
the Ming house; it therefore imposed strict moral codes on public culture
by cracking down on what it considered “obscene theater” ( yinxi).
2 The
Qing state’s effort to purge the public morality of sexually provocative ele-
ments won the support of the scholar-ofﬁcial elite and local Confucian gen-
try, who shared the Manchu criticism of the late Ming cult of qing.
Emerging amid these circumstances, Qing opera culture assumed distinc-
tive masculine characteristics that set it apart from the heterosexual Ming
theaters that preceded it and the more feminized Republican opera culture
that followed it. 
The Qing state adopted a strict Confucian ideology that deﬁned
women’s proper place as within the home, while social customs discour-
aged women from entering public arenas.
3 Women were, by law and cus-
tom, largely excluded from public entertainment venues, such as theaters,
teahouses, and gambling halls, where opera was staged. Upper-class women
could view performances only inside their homes or in the homes of rela-
tives and friends, while lower-class women had access to shows only dur-
ing local festivals, lineage or religious ceremonies, and community
celebrations, when operas were performed in public, free of charge. Even
during these public events, women’s attendance was minimal. While house-
hold responsibilities and custom required wealthier women to stay at home
The Origins of Yue Opera    27

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===

(especially after dark), poorer women had to work long hours to earn a liv-
ing and hardly had time to remain for long at the few shows they could
attend; additionally, they were also bound by the social customs that dis-
couraged all women from appearing in public.
4 Women in general, there-
fore, rich and poor alike, had limited access to public opera shows and were
entirely excluded from performances in commercial venues.
5 Since they
were not signiﬁcant patrons or paying customers, they had little inﬂuence
in shaping this major form of entertainment. 
Moreover, as the Qing state considered women performers to be a kind
of prostitute and the source of sexually provocative performances, its sup-
pression of so-called obscene theaters went hand in hand with repeated
prohibition of women performers. The earliest such prohibition was issued
in 1671, the tenth year of the reign of the Kangxi emperor. Similar bans
appeared many more times during the Kangxi reign, as well as during the
Yongzheng and Qianlong reigns, and the last ban was issued in 1774, the
thirty-ninth year of the Qianlong reign.
6 In the countryside, female per-
formers were prohibited from participating in religious and lineage cere-
monies, the most popular occasions for staging opera. Owing to relentless
central and local government crackdowns, women performers generally dis-
appeared from public view after 1774, except for a small number who
appeared in the foreign settlements in Shanghai and Tianjin in the late nine-
teenth century.
7
In the absence of female performers, boy actors and female imperson-
ators came to occupy prominent roles in popular theater. The most famous
female impersonator was Wei Changsheng, a Sichuan native who played
young female roles in “Shaanxi clapper opera” (Shaanxi bangzi ). Wei made
his ﬁrst appearance in Beijing in 1779, and his beauty, skill, and unrestrained
eroticism immediately created a sensation. Wei and his cohorts made
Shaanxi clapper opera the most popular theater in the capital, until the court
expelled him from Beijing and disbanded his troupe in 1785.
8 Wei then
joined a Kun opera troupe and soon left Beijing for Yangzhou and the Jiang-
nan area (the Yangzi River delta surrounding Suzhou, Hangzhou, and Shang-
hai), while Shaanxi clapper opera eventually retreated to its home in the
northwest. In the 1790s, four pihuang opera troupes from Anhui,
9 who had
entered the capital for the celebration of the Qianlong emperor’s  eightieth
birthday, created a similar sensation with their leading female imperson-
ators, resulting in another crackdown on “obscene” opera in the capital by
the new Jiaqing emperor in 1798.
10 The opera troupes from Anhui even-
tually won ofﬁcial approval by shifting the focus of their performances from
28 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===

women’s to men’s roles and thereby managed to take root in Beijing. Over
the ensuing decades, as the Anhui troupes absorbed the inﬂuence of ofﬁ-
cial ideology and catered to the tastes of a capital-based political and intel-
lectual elite, they developed a new opera form known as Jingju, or opera
of the capital city of Beijing. 
Thus, by the nineteenth century, through state and elite intervention,
a new opera culture took shape. Not only did operatic representations of
women become the exclusive purview of men, as female roles were per-
formed by and for men, but female roles were further reduced to support-
ing positions, as love stories gave way to plays that accorded with Qing
ideology. In contrast to the Ming chuanqi genre, Qing opera typically told
grand narratives about the empire and the dynasty and featured emperors,
ministers, and generals as protagonists. The form of the performance grew
rigid and formulaic, as a strict system of role designs and highly formal-
ized postures developed for portraying stereotypical characters. In general,
male roles included laosheng (bearded males), for moralistic civil ofﬁcials;
wusheng (military males), for spirited generals; jing (known as hualian [lit.,
“painted faces”]), for simple-minded or mean ofﬁcials; and chou (clowns).
Typical female characters were serious young women known as qingyi (lit.,
“blue-clothed ladies”); outgoing young women, or huadan (lit., “colorful
women”), who were in most cases servants of the main female characters;
and old women, or laodan. 
The artistic transformation of Anhui opera into a capital-city form was
complete when it made imperial narratives the main theme of its per-
formances while establishing male roles as the leading roles. Soon there-
after, a cluster of leading actors rose from the status of lowly entertainers
to cultural celebrities who enjoyed imperial patronage and the support
of a sophisticated male audience composed of ofﬁcials, generals, imperial
students, courtiers, clerks, government runners, examination candidates,
and Manchu aristocrats.
11 A dozen or so famous actors—the most famous
of whom were Cheng Changgeng, Tan Xinpei, Yang Yuelou, Yang Xiaolou,
and Li Chunlai—personiﬁed ministers and generals and played out sto-
ries drawn from ofﬁcial as well as popular histories. Even a cursory exam-
ination of the plays developed during this period leaves no doubt that
they dealt mostly with historical battles and major events, as the follow-
ing titles indicate: The Battle of Chengdu (Zhan Chengdu), Borrowing Arrows
from the Enemy (Caochuan jie jian), Dingjun Mountain (Dingjun shan), and
Capturing and Releasing Cao Cao (Zhuofang Cao).
12 One of the most fre-
quently performed plays, Generals of the Yang Family(Yangjia jiang), tells the
The Origins of Yue Opera    29

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===

story of a family that sacriﬁced almost all its men to the Song dynasty’s
war against invading barbarians. In the latter half of the nineteenth cen-
tury, Beijing opera spread throughout the country with the support of a
national political and intellectual elite, from provincial capitals to local
market towns and villages, setting new standards of content and style for
local operas to follow. 
Major regional opera genres of the time, including clapper operas in the
north and luantan(southern variations of clapper operas) and pihuang operas
in the southern and central provinces, underwent similar transitions dur-
ing the nineteenth century. Although regional major operas maintained
their local color by singing tunes in local dialects, they shared a repertoire
of plays and acting styles with Beijing opera. Together, these major operas
and their patrons fashioned the male-dominant opera culture of the Qing
dynasty. 
Parallel to these major operas were folk operas active at the lower level
of society.
13 The term “minor operas” (xiaoxi) has been used loosely in opera
circles in China in order to distinguish the numerous folk operas from “major
operas” ( daxi), which encompassed more sophisticated and inﬂuential
national and regional genres such as Beijing opera and various clapper
operas.
14 Minor operas emerged in rural areas throughout China during
the nineteenth century; they were part of the local peasant economy and
offshoots of local peasant culture. The best-known genres include yangge
in Shaanxi and other parts in the north, “ﬂower-drum” ( huagu) in Hunan,
“ﬂower-lantern” (huadeng) in Yunnan, various “storytelling” (tanhuang) gen-
res in Zhejiang and Jiangsu, and “tea-picking” (caicha) among the Hakkas,
as well as boy-singers’ opera in Fujian, “lotus tone” (lianhua luozi) in Hebei
(predecessor of pingopera), and “little opera” (xiaogeban) in Shengxian, Zhe-
jiang (a forerunner of Yue opera).
15 Often started by poor peasants trying
to scrape together extra income during the agricultural off-season, minor
operas held low social status and were usually not allowed to be performed
at religious ceremonies or in ancestral halls. The peasant artists staged their
performances mainly in local gambling houses, low-end teahouses, and
sometimes in the homes of rich local families on celebratory occasions,
charging low fees so that they could stay in business in the poorer rural
areas. Indeed, many minor operas were known locally as “the beggar’s opera”
(taofan xi), as the peasant performers sang while begging for food and money
in the streets and in front of wealthy households. The performances were
rough around the edges: costumes, if they were worn at all, were shabby;
30 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 52 ===

lyrics were composed in local colloquial dialects; melodies were simple and
repetitive; acting was unpolished and bawdy.16
Minor operas also differed from major operas with respect to their reper-
toires, narrative focus, and style. The repertoires of minor operas were drawn
from a variety of sources, including popular religious scripts, folk songs
and tales, popular ballads and storytelling traditions, and accounts of the
daily lives of the peasantry. The main roles in minor operas were a young
man and a young woman who played out scholar-beauty love stories such
as Pearl Pagoda (Zhenzhu ta), or moments of local, real-life drama, as sug-
gested by such titles as Selling Charcoal (Mai qingtan) and Child Bride Returns
Home (Yangxifu hui niangjia).
17 Minor-opera plays were concerned with indi-
vidual fortunes, not the fate or vicissitudes of the empire, and told stories
about love and desire, loyalty and betrayal, and fortune and misery. Draw-
ing on folk religious motifs and local superstitions, such as retribution and
ghost stories, as well as such ofﬁcially endorsed moral themes as ﬁlial piety,
these stories delivered mixed messages and ambiguous moral lessons. Good
performances were both entertaining and full of folk wisdom. Although
not always clear-cut in practice, a general difference between minor and
major operas existed beyond doubt. 
Minor operas were part of the male-dominant opera culture of the time,
with all the ambiguities and contradictions that attended the local practice
of gender. In minor operas, as in major operas, all the performers were men.
Even within all-male companies, gender hierarchies were prevalent, as male
roles were higher in status than female roles. The bias against female roles
was closely related to local superstitions but had little to do with actual pro-
fessional ranks. A popular actor specializing in female roles, for example,
was often the leading actor in the company and earned the highest salary,
but he was still not allowed to sit on the dressing boxes backstage or walk
in front of actors playing male roles when the troupe hiked to the next site.
18
On the whole, the gender hierarchy was less rigid in minor-opera cul-
ture, which absorbed less ofﬁcial ideology and existed more as part of the
daily life of the countryside. As seen in Shengxian little opera, the content
of minor opera, which focused on everyday peasant life and scholar-beauty
love stories, was more appealing to rural women, while the performances
were more accessible. Because of their small size and light instruments,
minor-opera troupes could perform inside homes or in the open space in
front of a sponsor’s house, and neighbors and villagers could attend per-
formances for a token contribution. Such performances, unlike the much
The Origins of Yue Opera    31

=== PDF PAGE 53 ===

more elaborate events of “major-opera performance” ( chang daxi ), were
informal and required much less consideration of the status and propri-
ety of village women than did elaborate public performance of major
operas. 
Both historical records and oral histories point to periodic ofﬁcial pro-
hibitions of minor operas for their heterodox content and vulgar style, while
local elites viliﬁed them either out of ideological conviction or for personal
gain.
19 Authorities failed to eliminate minor opera, however, for it was part
of the social and economic structure of late Qing rural life. The perform-
ers often desperately needed whatever income they could scratch together
from their seasonal performances, and the local population needed enter-
tainment at the lowest possible cost. For the same reasons, however, minor
operas remained minor and relatively undeveloped during the nineteenth
century. Their audiences had little purchasing power, their performances
drew the wrath of ofﬁcials, and their styles were too local to attract an audi-
ence beyond regional colloquial boundaries. 
The Feminine T ransformation of Opera Culture during the Republican Era
Opera culture underwent a major transformation during the twentieth cen-
tury, as industrialization, urbanization, and revolution changed Chinese
society. The decline of major operas, the rise of minor operas, and a gen-
eral trend of feminization marked the century’s new opera culture. This
new opera culture came about ﬁrst and foremost by feminizing the oper-
atic body, which occurred when a critical mass of actresses and female
audience members entered the opera world. When the 1911 Republican
Revolution overthrew the imperial system and opened up Chinese society
to wide-ranging social and political changes, women’s liberation became
one of the most championed issues within a broader national discourse
about making China a strong and wealthy nation. The May Fourth New
Culture Movement that followed made women’s liberation a benchmark
of China’s social reform and cultural modernity and sought to popular-
ize its rhetoric among a nationwide reading population. Related issues,
such as free love and marriage, women’s education, women’s work and
economic independence, and women’s position in the family and society
all became heated topics in popular and intellectual publications. Women
were eager to take advantage of the opportunities these changing cir-
cumstances offered them. Upper-class women began assuming new roles
and responsibilities outside the home. Some joined revolutionary  orga -
32 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 54 ===

nizations, others devoted themselves to education, and young women from
wealthy families enrolled in new schools. Still others enjoyed newfound
freedoms by going to theaters. At the same time, working-class women
found in acting a means of earning a living. Gradually, a great number of
women became participants in the entertainment industry, as audience
members and performers. The presence of women eventually made oper-
atic explorations of women and women’s issues no longer the exclusive
purview of men. 
The increasing numbers of women operagoers brought about a shift in
emphasis from male to female roles in Beijing opera in the early Republi-
can period, as is evident in the emergence of the “four great female imper-
sonators” (sida mingdan): Mei Lanfang, Shang Xiaoyun, Cheng Yanqiu, and
Xun Huisheng. Qi Rushan, an intellectual and expert in European and Chi-
nese operas who was much involved in Mei Lanfang’s Beijing opera reforms,
reasoned that the success of any actor depended on his ability to attract
women spectators. Qi considered that an actor could become popular and
successful only if he appealed to women, and that his success would be
compromised if he appealed only to male patrons. Qi paraphrased popu-
lar sayings of the time to explain: 
Take a couple: if the husband wants to see a show but his wife is not inter-
ested, the wife will prevent the husband from going. If, however, the wife
wants to go but her husband does not, the wife will make her husband go
with her. In a family situation, a husband could go to the theater by himself
without bringing the children along. But if the wife wants to go, then she
would most likely bring her children with her. Among circles of friends, men
often go to the theater by themselves or with one other friend, but they rarely
treat their friends to opera shows. Women, on the other hand, like to gather
in groups and go together. Thus, if an actor can make one woman come, she
will bring many more with her to the theater. If an actor can make one man
interested, the man may not come at all if his wife is not interested. As the
saying goes: “A popular, good actor is one who can appeal to women.”
20
Lending support to Qi’s views, Mei Lanfang attributed his own popularity
to the growth of female audiences and testiﬁed to the profound impact of
female operagoers on Beijing opera:
In the past, neither night opera performances nor female audience members
were allowed in Beijing’s theaters. Social custom deemed the mixing of men
The Origins of Yue Opera    33

=== PDF PAGE 55 ===

and women in public injurious to public morality, as if opera were speciﬁ-
cally sung for men, and women did not have the right to enjoy this kind of
legitimate entertainment. This was indeed a stubbornness of the feudal age.
Since the Republican era, great numbers of female patrons have poured into
theaters and thus brought about sudden changes to the performing arts as
a whole. In the past, bearded characters [ laosheng] and male military char-
acters [wusheng] reigned in Beijing opera, because members of a generally
male audience had become connoisseurs of the art of performers of bearded
men and military ﬁgures, due to their long-standing patronage of Beijing
opera. Female audience members were new to the theater and thus naturally
lacked expertise. Since they came only to view the lively atmosphere [ kan
re’nao], they would certainly pick out the pretty ones ﬁrst. Therefore, female
characters [dan] became their favorites. In a few years, qingyi [or serious young
female characters] were attracting large crowds and in one jump became the
leading roles in theatrical art.
21
Aside from their lack of expertise, which prevented them from appreciat-
ing male roles, as Mei explained, women’s interests in female roles may also
have had to do with their greater facility in relating to female characters
than to emperors, generals, and court ofﬁcials. In any case, the corre lation
between the rise of women audiences and the new emphasis on female roles
is unmistakable. 
The rise of the four great female impersonators was accompanied by
new plays centered on female protagonists, which created a twentieth-cen-
tury dimension in Beijing opera and changed both its repertoire and its act-
ing style. During the ﬁrst two decades of the Republican period, Mei
Lanfang, a pioneer of Beijing opera’s modern reforms, created a dozen or
so new works in an effort to explore various historical and literary female
ﬁgures, including the mythological ﬁgure Chang’e, the Tang dynasty
beauty Yang Guifei, the legendary female soldier Hua Mulan, and Lin Daiyu,
the sickly beauty in the Qing dynasty novel Dream of the Red Chamber. In an
attempt to present his characters as real and complex human beings, rather
than as stereotypes, Mei was forced to break the strict codes of stylized
performances pertaining to qingyi, or serious young women, and huadan, or
lively young women, characters. Mei’s reforms made his characters capa-
ble of expressing both sorrow and happiness and being both reserved and
outgoing; the personalities of his characters thus blurred the traditional
line between qingyi and huadan.
22
When the female impersonator Shang Xiaoyun staged the new plays A
34 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 56 ===

Modern Nun (Modeng jia’nü) and Zhuo Wenjun(Zhuo Wenjun), he was hailed
by a commentator, in typical May Fourth hyperbole, as follows: “I think
that Zhuo Wenjun was the ﬁrst woman in several thousand years of Chi-
nese history who believed in free love. The fact that she worked as a cook
in her own restaurant proves that she was the ﬁrst woman who embraced
the idea of [economic] independence. Now Shang Xiaoyun has put this
history onstage, in an effort very much in accordance with the trend toward
women’s liberation.”
23 Cheng Yanqiu was known for his impersonation of
unfortunate but virtuous women in traditional society, such as Su San in
Spring of the Jade Hall (Yutang Chun). One commentator wrote about the
signiﬁcance of Cheng’s characters by combining May Fourth rhetoric with
an old ethic, as if no effort were required to reconcile the May Fourth con-
demnation of the old society that had made women suffer and the tradi-
tional female virtue of self-denial: “Chinese women have been suppressed
by men for the past several thousand years under the feudal system. All of
the commemorative arches erected in the past in honor of chaste women
actually represent countless sorrowful life histories. Cheng Yanqiu’s char-
acters indeed represent the most precious female role models in Chinese
history.”
24
As female audiences grew in size and female roles and protagonists
became increasingly popular, female performers also began to prosper in
Beijing opera circles. The ﬁrst generation of female performers was born
around the time of the 1911 Republican Revolution and began to study
the art during the May Fourth period. Meng Xiaodong was perhaps the
ﬁrst accomplished female Beijing opera performer who specialized in
laosheng, the leading male role. Other well-known women performers of
the period—Xue Yanqin, Xin Yanqiu, and Wang Yurong—specialized in
leading female roles and began to make a name for themselves around
the mid-1920s. The next generation, including some of the best Beijing
opera performers, such as Yan Huizhu, Tong Zhiling, and Li Yuru, studied
with the four great female impersonators and became established in the
1940s.
25 From that time onward, female performers generally replaced the
much celebrated male masters in the performance of female roles.26
Other major local operas from the Qing period also opened up to accom-
modate female performers and women’s taste. These pro-women reforms,
however, could not reverse a general decline of major operas in the early
Republican period.
27 The dilemma for major operas was as follows: on the
one hand, with the dismantling of the emperor system and the replace-
ment of ministers and generals with new kinds of political representatives,
The Origins of Yue Opera    35

=== PDF PAGE 57 ===

imperial narratives became increasingly irrelevant and unappealing to the
new Republican audience, half of which now consisted of women; on the
other hand, however, the masculine style of major operas, which developed
with their male-centered content, was too integral a part of these operas’
artistic identity to be cast away or sufﬁciently reformed to accommodate
more feminine narratives. In short, the male-centered Qing major operas
could not adapt to the new era without losing their identity, and thus their
decline was inevitable. By 1949, at the founding of the People’s Republic
of China, many major operas were on the verge of extinction and were
rescued only because of the new government’s efforts to preserve the
national cultural heritage.
28
Beijing opera retained its popularity a little longer owing to its high
political and social status, its historical and ongoing association with ofﬁ-
cials, military ﬁgures, and men of letters, and its evolving artistic sophis-
tication as perhaps best exempliﬁed by the modern reforms of the four
great female impersonators. During the Republican period, patronage of
Beijing opera became a marker of taste and status for rich and powerful
men, and male elites in political, intellectual, and business circles sup-
ported Beijing opera for various reasons. While old-fashioned wealthy
men found nostalgic pleasure in the opera, reform-minded intellectuals
and Nationalist government ofﬁcials found in it authentic Chinese aes-
thetics useful for the construction of a national identity that could bal-
ance the rapid trend toward Western-style modernization. Yet, despite
such political and intellectual support, Beijing opera’s popularity was ulti-
mately challenged and surpassed by emerging folk forms of minor operas,
most dramatically by ping opera in the Tianjin-Beijing area and Yue opera
in Shanghai and the Jiangnan region, but also by numerous other local
minor operas, such as Lü opera in Shandong, Yu opera in Henan, and Chu
opera in Hubei.
29
With the decline of masculine major operas, minor operas rose to
answer the call of the new era. Although minor operas shared the male-
centered characteristics of Qing opera, they proved capable of accom-
modating the trend of feminization, as their content was more “feminine”
to begin with and their styles less formulaic. Given the importance of
Western inﬂuences on China’s modern changes, much early moderniza-
tion was concentrated in treaty-port cities where new ideas and cultural
forms were ﬁrst tried out. Shanghai, Tianjin, and Xiamen, therefore,
became exciting places for minor operas where a rising urban mass audi-
36 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 58 ===

ence, of which women made up a large part, helped shape their trans-
formation into popular urban forms. 
Broadly viewed, the rise of minor operas in urban centers was a direct
response to mass urban migrations, the rhetoric of women’s liberation, and
women’s entrance into the popular-culture market. The early twentieth cen-
tury witnessed the growth of lower-income urban populations, owing to
large-scale migration to, and industrialization in, coastal cities. Peasants
moved to cities to become factory workers, clerks, barbers, and laborers
such as rickshaw pullers and porters. There were also large numbers of female
migrants, whose occupations ranged from housewives, to domestic helpers,
to factory workers. Minor operas moved into the city along with their native-
place and lower-class constituencies and developed rapidly in urban cen-
ters. The connection between minor operas and their constituencies within
this modern urban transition was partially captured in a contemporaneous
commentary on the “ didu opera” (diduban or diduxi, nicknames for Sheng-
xian little opera among Shanghai residents of the time) troupe.
30 The author,
Xiao Wo, proposed taking a modern view:
The twentieth century is an age of the people. For this reason, everything
reﬂected in the arts is simple, easy to understand, and hence of the people.
One example in our country is that our written language has changed from
classic to vernacular, and then to the language of commoners. In painting,
the popular cartoon has appeared, while in theater, there is a call for popu-
lar drama. In short, all these changes represent the spirit of the age, which
is to make the masses understand the arts. Then, how can you say diduxi [didu
opera] is not a product of the age? If someone thinks this statement is a slight
exaggeration, then let’s ask why diduopera is so popular with the masses nowa-
days. Why do we see the growing number of troupes and audiences only of
didu opera and not of any other opera? The fact is undeniable. Didu opera’s
singing is simple, easygoing, and straightforward, which is not only in accor-
dance with the spirit of the age but moreover ﬁts the taste of the masses, as
it is easy to follow.
31
Presenting didu opera as in tune with the Republican ideology of popular
rights, Xiao defended and promoted the opera of his native place in the
face of the traditional class bias against minor operas. Moreover, he sought
further to enhance minor operas’ political legitimacy by arguing, in the
new rhetoric of theatrical reform, that they were valuable tools for mass
The Origins of Yue Opera    37

=== PDF PAGE 59 ===

education. Xiao continued by comparing Shengxian opera and Beijing opera,
pointing out that the long, complicated tunes of Beijing opera made it
difﬁcult for the audience to understand the lyrics and follow the plots. As
a tabloid author, who hailed Shengxian little opera as a purveyor of mass
education for poorer urban constituencies, put it:
Didu opera is the most valuable and most educational drama. Didu opera’s
simple lyrics are like words as elementary as “people, hand, foot, knife, ruler”
in the ﬁrst lesson of a textbook, enlightening young students and educating
the masses. Didu opera is particularly useful in our country where education
has not yet become popularized. Kun opera, in contrast, declines rapidly
because it is too abstruse [for the populace] to understand.
32
At the same time, the new Republican ideology of women’s liberation
lifted traditional imperial sanctions against minor opera and its love sto-
ries. Supported by the May Fourth New Culture idea of free love and mar-
riage, as opposed to Confucian puritanism and the traditional institution
of arranged marriage, the love theme became prominent in theatrical rep-
resentations. Minor-opera artists needed only to recast traditional scholar-
beauty stories in the new rhetoric of free love and marriage and women’s
rights to adapt to the new fashion. 
The entrance of women into the entertainment market as both performers
and paying consumers greatly affected the modern transformation of
minor operas. Women’s impact is clearest in the cases of women’s Yue opera
in Shanghai and ping opera in Tianjin. More than other minor operas, Yue
opera and ping opera were centered on love stories, women performers,
and female or feminized male roles and were aimed at women audiences.
Ping opera was originally an all-male theater, and women appeared on its
stages only in the foreign settlement of Tianjin around the turn of the
twentieth century. However, women performers and female characters
soon thereafter took center stage, with the opera becoming increasingly
popular in the Beijing-Tianjin area and spreading to the northeastern
provinces and Shanghai in the 1930s and 1940s. During roughly the same
period, all-female Shengxian opera troupes created a sensation in Shang-
hai, quickly displacing the all-male Shengxian troupes and making Yue
opera exclusively an actresses’ domain. In the process, ping opera over-
took both Beijing opera and Hebei clapper opera in popularity in the north,
and women’s Yue opera overtook Beijing opera and the local Shanghai
opera to become the most popular genre in Shanghai and Zhejiang.
33 That
38 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 60 ===

these two forms of theater should have become the most popular operas
in their respective areas strongly suggests a close connection between
women’s entrance into the cultural market as consumers and the rise of
minor operas.
The Story of Shengxian Little Opera
It was within this context that the early history of Yue opera unfolded. 
“In the thirty-second year of the reign of the Guangxu emperor, 1906,
Yue opera was born,” or so Ma Chaoshui (1895–1975) declared in his On
the Early Development of Yue Opera (Yueju fazhan shu).34 This proclamation is
part of an oral history transmitted through three generations of story-singers
and performers and collected in the late 1950s, when a group of twenty-
ﬁve retired Yue opera actors gathered together for a government-sponsored
oral-history workshop in Shengxian. Ma Chaoshui, one of the twenty-ﬁve
retirees, put this oral history on paper in 1960. This and a cluster of indi-
vidual oral histories, studies of family and lineage books published in Tr a c -
ing the Origins of Yue Opera(Yueju suyuan), a collection of original lyrics from
the story-singing tradition,
35 and supplementary historical documents
provide a glimpse of the opera’s origins and early development. 
Yue opera went through several stages in its early development. Not
unlike the hip-hop originating among entertainment-hungry black youth
in the inner city ghettos of the late twentieth-century United States, Yue
opera began as a local tune of peasant self-entertainment in the country-
side of Shengxian, Shaoxing prefecture, Zhejiang. Talented young peas-
ants would sing about everything in a simple tune based on the sigongscale
system, or sigong diao.
36 Jin Qibing, an admirable talent from a certain Horse
Pond Village (Matang Cun) who was later remembered as the founding
father of Yue opera, was said to be skilled at not only ﬁlling in original
lyrics but also telling stories drawn from historical novels and Buddhist
literature that he heard from storytellers. Jin apparently inspired and taught
many young peasants, and when harvests were poor, he and his disciples
made some extra income with their singing. At ﬁrst, Jin and his followers
sang at the doors of better-off households in villages and towns not too
far from home during the lunar New Year. In return for the auspicious words
they sang, they hoped to be rewarded with a couple of New Year cakes
or dumplings. If all went well, they would return home with enough food
to sustain their families over the holiday season. The singers thus earned
the nickname “beggar’s stories” (taofan shu). Before long, story-singers started
The Origins of Yue Opera    39

=== PDF PAGE 61 ===

to take advantage of the agricultural off-seasons and went out regularly
on singing tours; it is said that some masters of the younger generation
spent more time singing than plowing and became semiprofessional
singers.
37
The younger generation, according to oral histories, managed to increase
the professional level of their art signiﬁcantly, with singers from artisan back-
grounds, such as Jin Zhitang and Xiang Jintang, playing important roles in
this process. Jin Zhitang, it is said, used to station his shoe-repair stand out-
side major teahouses so that he could listen to the master singers inside.
Apparently, Jin learned a great number of long stories and became familiar
with storytelling skills while repairing shoes for his customers. Meanwhile,
increasing numbers of Shengxian natives were turning to story-singing as
a form of livelihood, making it into a countywide industry in the late nine-
teenth century when the rural economy deteriorated. 
As their numbers increased, Shengxian story-singers began to expand
into market towns in the rich area centered on Hangzhou, Jiaxing, and
Huzhou in the Yangzi River delta, the Hang-Jia-Hu area. Shengxian mas-
ters competed with storytellers of the Hangzhou and Suzhou styles, two
major storytelling genres long established in this area, and, when neces-
sary, used their ﬁsts to ﬁght for their share of the market.
38 A serious alter-
cation apparently broke out in 1869 between Hangzhou-style masters and
newly arrived Shengxian masters over the right to perform in a major tea-
house in Yuhang, a market town near Hangzhou. Local ofﬁcials, interest-
ingly, ruled that both parties had the right to perform under the condition
that they pay a tax to local government. An ofﬁcial stone tablet was there-
upon erected and inscribed with four large characters that read “Sing sto-
ries and pay taxes” (Chang shu wan liang).
39 The Shengxian story-singers,
as oral histories have it, then started a golden age of performing at market
towns in the Hang-Jia-Hu area.
40
By the early years of the 1900s, however, Shengxian story-singing was
losing ground in market towns, and Ma Chaoshui and his colleagues had
to move back to the countryside. While oral histories do not provide any
speciﬁc reason for this development, it is likely that the illiterate story-
singers from Shengxian were at the end of their wits in attempting to com-
pete with the more learned and sophisticated Suzhou and Hangzhou
masters. It was at this moment, however, that Shengxian story-singing mas-
ters began to turn to operatic performance. 
Shengxian storytelling had its own style, and performers were aware of
40 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 62 ===

the difference between their style and that of major forms such as Suzhou
and Hangzhou storytelling. As Ma Chaoshui noted:
In major storytelling, one master told the whole story by himself, while in
our minor storytelling, there was the master and one or two companions
who sang ﬁxed repetitive melodies on the side. Major-storytelling forms fea-
tured tales like Romance of Yue Fei [Shuo Yue quanzhuan] and Romance of the
Three Kingdoms[Sanguo yanyi]. Minor storytelling told mostly tales like Story
of the White Snake [Baishe zhuan], The Golden Dragon Whip (Jinlong bian), Seven
Beauties (Qimei tu), and Pearl Pagoda.
41
The division between major- and minor-storytelling traditions was as clear
as the division in opera traditions. While major-storytelling forms focused
on historical, military, and political narratives, minor-storytelling forms
elaborated on love, betrayal, and personal fortunes. Other differences were
that the Shengxian style combined speaking with singing and chanting
on the side and required two or three performers who had to remain stand-
ing onstage to carry out the story. Compared with the conventional story -
telling method featuring one master who relied primarily on his oral skills
to tell the story, the Shengxian style involved more physical movements,
which made its transition to opera quite easy. 
Early in 1906, two or three groups of Shengxian story-singers began,
separately but simultaneously, to perform the stories they had thus far only
been narrating and thus gave birth to Shengxian little opera. Ma Chaoshui
recounted how this occurred on a cold winter night in the countryside of
Yuhang, when Ma and his master ran into two pairs of touring singers. They
all stayed at the patron Chen Wanyuan’s home, which was, as they knew,
always open to singers. Excited by the presence of three pairs of singers,
villagers gathered at Chen’s home and asked to be entertained. In order to
include all the singers in the performance, Chen suggested they act out a
story together, instead of each pair singing its own story. Apparently, the
suggestion was well taken. Using Mr. and Mrs. Chen’s clothes as costumes,
the singers staged a four-hour performance of Pearl Pagoda, punctuated by
occasional outbursts of friendly laughter from the audience, in Chen’s liv-
ing room.
News of the innovation spread fast, and other story-singers also turned
to acting. Some singers, upon returning home in the spring to work in the
ﬁelds, met with requests from fellow villagers that they put on plays, and
The Origins of Yue Opera    41

=== PDF PAGE 63 ===

the villagers promised to take care of the singers’ lands in exchange. Quickly,
all storytellers turned to acting, and a new minor opera began to take shape.
Because of its unpretentious style and small scale, the villagers gave it the
endearing nickname “little opera,” in contrast to “Shaoxing major opera”
(Shaoxing daban). 
Over the next few years, little-opera troupes multiplied in Shengxian,
but the opera remained part of the local peasant culture. Actors were mostly
peasants who worked in the ﬁelds during busy agricultural seasons and
performed only during off-seasons or on special occasions. Troupes usu-
ally had seven or eight members; troupe formation and performances were
rather casual. An actor might join an ongoing performance, and another
actor might leave one performance to join another. The only musical instru-
ments used in these days were a pair of small drums and a wooden clap-
per, played by any performer who was not onstage, to keep the rhythm.
Costumes were mostly everyday clothing, and audiences did not mind
when the plaster casts that some performers used to heal muscle and ten-
don injuries were exposed. There were few props to speak of, and troupe
members carried the few they owned from village to village on their shoul-
ders. Later, some troupes accumulated small funds and rented costumes
and instruments from Shaoxing major-opera troupes, but there was never
anything elaborate about little-opera performances. The troupes also
charged very low fees for a full program, which lasted from afternoon to
dawn. Their fees were so low that even small villages could afford them.
Performances at gambling gatherings, commonly known as xing pengzi (lit.,
“to raise an awning [for a gambling gathering]”), were another source of
income for little-opera troupes.
42
Because of its high mobility and low overhead, little opera ﬂourished
at the lowest level of rural society, and the nature of the rural market in
turn informed the opera’s style. Villagers appreciated major-opera per-
formances for their bustling atmosphere and the variety of snacks sold by
food peddlers; they did not mind if they could not actually hear the lyrics,
because everyone was already familiar with the stories. Their reasons for
appreciating little opera were very different. Little-opera performances
created a much more intimate relationship with audiences, as perform-
ances were casual and small in scale. Moreover, little opera used plain ver-
nacular language, simple local tones for speech and singing, and hardly
any musical instruments. All these features made it easy for local audi-
ences to hear the lyrics and speeches clearly and to follow the plot more
closely. 
42 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 64 ===

The content of little opera, which inherited a generous repertoire of
established stories from its story-singing predecessor as well as drew on
local peasant culture and Buddhist texts, was also of great interest to rural
residents. From story-singing, little opera inherited a set of stories known
as “news” stories, which vividly described local peasant life, as seen in such
titles as Ten Rare Things(Shi xiqi) and Ten Weird Things(Shi guguai).
43 “Sing
the news” ( chang xinwen) segments often served as a popular prelude to a
program. In a well-known piece, Selling the Mother-in-Law (Mai po ji), a
wicked daughter-in-law plots to get rid of her aged mother-in-law. She
bribes a matchmaker to marry off the old lady, and the greedy match-
maker cheats a poor young peasant by making him spend his life savings
for the bride. The young man happily takes the bride home, only to dis-
cover that she is a teary-eyed old woman. After hearing the woman’s sad
story, the young man’s anger turns to sympathy, and he decides to adopt
her as his mother. Deeply moved, the old woman tells him about a for-
tune her late husband secretly handed to her just before his death, and
she advises the young man to ﬁnd a nice wife and start a small business
with the money. The bad daughter-in-law regrets that she has thrown
away her good fortune, the matchmaker repents and ﬁnds the young peas-
ant a nice bride, and the old woman and young couple live a happy life
thereafter.
44
Little opera also inherited the romance from its story-singing predecessor.
When Shengxian story-singers entered market towns, they learned longer
pieces from the rich repertoires of storytelling traditions, and one of these,
among the most performed tales in both Shengxian story-singing and lit-
tle opera, is Pearl Pagoda. It tells a long, complex story about a young scholar
named Fang Qing. Fang hails from a scholar-ofﬁcial family in Henan. The
family becomes impoverished after Fang’s father dies, and Fang visits his
aunt to ask for a loan so that he can go to the capital and take the civil-
service examination. His snobbish aunt humiliates him and gives him noth-
ing. The aunt’s daughter overhears their conversation and, sympathetic to
her cousin, secretly gives the young scholar her pearl pagoda to pawn for
the money he needs. His uncle also sees a promising scholar in Fang and
grants the young man his daughter’s hand in marriage. On his way home,
Fang is robbed and almost freezes to death in the snow. The person who
stole from Fang is exposed when he takes the pearl pagoda to the local
pawnshop, and Fang is presumed dead. But Fang had in fact been rescued,
passes the exam, taking ﬁrst place, and is appointed to an ofﬁcial position.
One day, Fang disguises himself as a Daoist priest and is invited into his
The Origins of Yue Opera    43

=== PDF PAGE 65 ===

aunt’s house. In the process of telling her fortune, he purposefully criti-
cizes his aunt while hinting at his true identity. In the end, Fang’s iden-
tity is revealed, the aunt repents, and Fang happily marries his loving
cousin.
45
Little opera also drew on Buddhist traditions for its materials. Buddhist
Daughter of the Liu Family (Liu Xiangnü), a story adopted from the popular
Buddhist text Precious Volume about Liu Xiangnü (Liu Xiangnü baojuan), tells
the story of the enlightened daughter of the Liu family, who practices ﬁlial
piety, saves her parents from misfortune, and, at long last, enlightens them.
Historians of popular religion in late imperial China have shown that Bud-
dhism had considerable inﬂuence on the lives of rural women, and the Liu
Xiangnü story is but one example of the spread of Buddhist messages
through forms of peasant entertainment.
46
Oral accounts of the early history of little opera describe the opera’s
difﬁcult relationship with authorities and some members of the local elite.
While local moralists may have disapproved of the opera’s heterodox mes-
sage and bawdy style, local bullies considered the actors easy prey in their
power games, and government agencies ﬂexed their muscles by going after
the actors. According to Ding Yi, a local Yue opera researcher in Sheng-
xian, a little opera show at its home village in the summer of 1906 was almost
ruined by a bully, Fan Jinhuan, who controlled an eighteen-man militia. It
was an unspoken rule that anyone planning a show in this area had to send
gifts to Fan in advance. The show, Ding Yi said, was put together at the
last minute by local actors, who had just returned from a performance tour,
to entertain their fellow villagers. No gift was sent to Fan, and Fan dispatched
his men to arrest the singers. Outraged, the villagers selected eighteen young
men from the peasant association to protect the singers and also plead their
case with a member of the local gentry, Li Haifa, who was well connected
to ofﬁcials in both Shengxian and Dongyang Counties. Li, who had been
disgusted by Fan’s behavior for some time, took the opportunity to lead a
rebellion against Fan. On the day of the show, a big audience, including
many supporters from nearby villages, gathered around the stage. Li sat
right in the front row, and the eighteen young men were positioned on
both sides of the stage. When Fan’s men heard about this, they ﬂed before
they reached the spot.
47
In 1908, Regulations of Self-Government of Shengxian (Shengxian zizhi
zhang cheng), an ofﬁcial edict issued by the local government as part of
the national Constitutional Reform Movement, prohibited minor-opera
44 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 66 ===

performances of any kind, and the newly formed police force welcomed
this opportunity to show its power.48 Ma Chaoshui recounted another dra-
matic incident in which he and his troupe were arrested in a small village
and taken to the police station in Sanjie. An elderly gentry man bailed
them out, and then the man’s wife wanted to see them perform. A simple
stage of planks placed on top of haystacks was erected outside the man’s
yard, facing the police station, and the actors performed two plays for the
villagers, Double Golden Flowers (Shuang jin hua) and Pearl Pagoda. The show
was well received, and the audience was moved to tears by the scene in
which the daughter gives her pearl pagoda to her beloved cousin. The
show went on for several days, until the head of the police force became
so embarrassed that he begged the old man to end it. “We felt victorious,”
Ma commented, and he even dared to lecture the head of the police force,
or so he claimed in his account, arguing: “Opera is one of the three per-
suasions. The ﬁrst is the emperor’s law, a tough measure that promises cap-
ital punishment for those who dare to violate it. This is not the best way.
The second is the Buddhist way that makes people study sutras and learn
about retribution. The third is playful persuasion through opera. We show
the people the crystal-clear [difference between] good and evil by means
of our vivid performance.”
49 Although Ma’s depiction of the event need
not be taken on faith, his speech is a clear example of peasant appropria -
tion of the elite idea of “persuasion of the people” ( jiaohua) with which to
argue his case.
50
The troupes were not so lucky when performing outside of Shengxian.
Once, in Paito, Zhuji County, Ma Chaoshui and seven fellow actors were
charged with obscene performance and arrested in the middle of a show
by the local police chief, Zhou Zhongzen. Zhou, a Shengxian native him-
self, seems to have been ashamed of his native-place fellows’ lowly trade
and shows. He ridiculed the actor who played young female roles by parad-
ing him through the streets in his womanly makeup and stage costumes.
Then he had all the costumes burned. According to Ma, those who had
attended the show were not convinced that Zhou was in the right, as they
had witnessed nothing obscene, and so they stormed the police station.
“I took my men and ﬂed to Sandu,” Ma wrote. “We did not have any money
but still had seven or eight mouths to feed, so we had to perform some
story-singing in teahouses.” Later, they borrowed some costumes and
props and staged an opera; again, “the police objected and imposed a
four-yuan tax for each night of performance, while all we could earn from
The Origins of Yue Opera    45

=== PDF PAGE 67 ===

one night’s show was about three or four yuan. We had no choice but to
leave.”51
Ma’s account is rife with similar incidents of persecution but also reveals
a sense of pride at little opera’s rise from such adversity. Despite repeated
persecution, Shengxian little-opera troupes mushroomed all over the coun-
tryside, attesting to, among other things, the deep rural market for minor
operas. 
The rapid increase in the number of little-opera troupes in Shengxian
was also closely related to a downturn in the local economy. From 1907
to 1911, a drought in Shengxian destroyed all the crops. Many young men
joined little-opera troupes and left the county in search of a new liveli-
hood. Opera singing became a countywide industry, and little opera was
the main Shengxian export to adjacent areas.
52 The troupes traveled along
three traditional trade routes: through Xinchang and Yuyao to Ningbo in
eastern Zhejiang; through Dongyang and Zhuji to Jinhua in central Zhe-
jiang; and through Shangyu, Shaoxing, and Xiaoshan to the Hang-Jia-Hu
area in western Zhejiang.
53 The Hang-Jia-Hu area, highly developed and
a long-term base for Shengxian story-singers, was the most popular desti-
nation for little-opera troupes. Such a troupe performed in Hangzhou for
the ﬁrst time in 1910, and in Ningbo and Jinhua in 1915. Two years later,
in 1917, little opera staged the ﬁrst show in Shanghai.
54
Shengxian Opera in Shanghai
Shengxian little opera entered Shanghai along with a large ﬂow of immi-
grants from Zhejiang, especially the Ningbo-Shaoxing area. Yang Shao -
chun, a Shengxian native and a Beijing opera agent in Shanghai, brought
the ﬁrst little-opera troupe to Shanghai in 1917 . The twenty-odd mem-
bers of the troupe boarded a Ningbo-Shanghai steamboat and arrived at
the Shiliupu dock along the Huangpu River, where Zhejiang immigrants
dominated. As news of their arrival spread, Zhejiang natives crowded the
New Theater (Xin Wutai) to watch the city’s ﬁrst show of Shengxian lit-
tle opera. When the actors appeared onstage in their funny-looking cos-
tumes and began their clumsy singing and acting routines, the audience
burst into laughter. Many left before the end of the program, and few came
back for a second viewing. Yang Shaochun held out for a few weeks but
eventually gave up and disbanded the troupe; most of the actors sold their
bedding to buy tickets home.
55 A few months later, a Shaoxing major-
opera agent in Shanghai sponsored a second little-opera troupe. Despite
46 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 68 ===

an initial success that lasted a few months, the troupe disbanded within
half a year. A few further attempts were made in 1918 and 1919 without
much success.
56
The turning point came in the winter of 1919, as little opera’s effort to
enhance its production values converged with a new wave of social aware-
ness related to such issues as women’s liberation and free love and marriage
after the May Fourth Movement. Shengxian opera returned to Shanghai
with new plays boasting better-developed plots and characters as well as
more-reﬁned music, costumes, makeup, and acting.
57 Most plays during the
foundational phase of Shengxian opera in Shanghai were centered on love
stories, and the most successful plays included Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai
(or The Butterﬂy Lovers),
58 Emerald Hairpin(Biyu zan), Tale of the Lute (Pipa ji), and
Meng Lijun (Meng Lijun), all with positive portrayal of the heroines. 
The development of Emerald Hairpin and Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtaibest
illustrates the success of Shengxian opera in Shanghai. Set in the Ming
dynasty, Emerald Hairpin tells the tragic story of a young couple. Minister Li
Tingfu marries his only daughter, Li Xiuying, to Wang Yulin, son of a mem-
ber of the imperial academy. Li Xiuying’s cousin, Gu Wenyou, who is secretly
in love with her, conspires to separate the new couple. Gu arranges to have
a forged love letter supposedly written by Li and a stolen emerald hairpin
of hers placed in the new couple’s bedroom on their wedding night. When
Wang sees the items, he falls for Gu’s trick and concludes that Li is having
an affair with Gu. Furious, Wang rejects Li and berates her repeatedly or
ignores her. Unaware of the source of Wang’s anger, Li submits to his abuse
with the hope that her loyalty and love will eventually win his heart. 
In the original Wu opera (from adjacent Dongyang County) version of
this story, Li’s father kicks his daughter to death upon hearing about her
alleged violation of chastity. Then, after the truth comes to light, Wang
commits suicide in remorse and Gu is arrested and executed. In a previous
Shengxian version of this play, Li Xiuying eventually dies of melancholy,
while Gu Wenyou succumbs to lovesickness.
59 The play had never been
popular because the tragic ending involved the deaths of all the main char-
acters and the loss of heirs for all three families. But in Shanghai in the
winter of 1919, it was presented with an innovative and completely dif-
ferent ending. As Ma Chaoshui, who participated in the Shanghai adven-
ture and was in fact responsible for the revised ending, recalled:
The fourth time we went to Shanghai to perform in the Star Theater [Min -
xing] in Tianbao Lane, off Haining Road, I thought to myself: “Even though
The Origins of Yue Opera    47

=== PDF PAGE 69 ===

Shanghai’s market is really good, we still have to ﬁnd our way into it.” I
thought that the Dongyang Wu opera Emerald Hairpin was a moving story
and maybe a good choice. We had more than forty actors at the time. I went
out to the street to look for scripts and found a storybook in which Wang
Yulin abuses Li Xiuying until she dies. I thought that the ending was too
negative. Later I found a Buddhist edition that has Wang Yulin become a
zhuangyuan [ﬁrst place in the metropolitan civil-service examination] and
present the phoenix cap to Li Xiuying [seeking reconciliation]. I then wrote
the act “Presenting the Phoenix Cap” and had Zhang Yunbiao play Wang
Yulin. During the show, the audience was moved to tears as the story
unfolded.
60
Ma Chaoshui and his actors changed the story line and gave the play a
happy ending. Instead of simply accepting Wang’s allegation regarding
his daughter’s chastity, Li Xiuying’s father investigates and discovers that
the handwriting in the love letter, the evidence on which Wang based his
accusation, does not match his daughter’s. The story that follows was then
completely altered: Gu’s conspiracy is exposed, while Li Xiuying returns
to her natal home to recuperate, and Wang is left alone to rue his bad behav-
ior. In an effort to redeem himself, he studies hard and wins the title of
zhuangyuan. Upon his return from the capital after the examination, Wang
presents Li Xiuying with a phoenix cap, a gift he solicited specially from
the emperor in order to honor his wife. Li, however, refuses to accept it,
nor is she willing to go home with Wang, declaring instead that she wants
to live in a monastery for the rest of her life. In the closing act, everyone,
including all the characters in the play as well as members of the audi-
ence, must listen to Li Xiuying complain at length about her sufferings,
while Wang, the honorable zhuangyuan, is made to kneel at Li’s feet and
apologize. At the end of the play, the two are gloriously and happily
reunited.
61
This positive ending to an otherwise tragic story, with its vindication
of the heroine and criticism of the male protagonist, was most sympathetic
to women and accorded with the new concept of women’s liberation, rep-
resenting a clear departure from the misogynist operatic tradition of the
Qing period. The play was Shengxian opera’s ﬁrst big hit in Shanghai and
subsequently became a classic of the Yue opera repertoire. 
Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtaiwas a celebration of love that originated from
a folktale set in neighboring Shangyu County.
62 Some scholars believe that
48 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 70 ===

the ﬁrst written record of the story appeared during the Tang dynasty (618–
907) and told the following tale: 
Yingtai, daughter of the Zhu family in Shangyu, disguised herself in men’s
clothing and traveled in search of a school education. At school, she met
Liang Shanbo, a classmate from Guiji [present-day Shaoxing], whose style
name was Churen [lit., “with benevolence”]. Yingtai returned home ﬁrst;
one year later, Shanbo visited her at her home, only to discover that Ying-
tai was a woman. He was deeply affected. Upon his return home, Shanbo
asked his parents to arrange for his marriage with the Zhu family, but Ying-
tai had already been betrothed to the son of the Ma family. Shanbo later
served as the magistrate of Yin county [present-day Ningbo], where he passed
away from sickness. He was buried in the western side of Maocheng [east
of Yin County]. On her way to Ma’s house as a bride, Yingtai’s boat was
held up by storms and big waves when it passed the site of Shanbo’s tomb.
Having learned that Shanbo was buried nearby, Yingtai landed and cried
passionately before his grave. Suddenly, the ground below her split open
and collapsed, and Yingtai was thus buried with Shanbo. Prime Minister Xie
An [320–385] of the [Eastern] Jin dynasty [317–420] issued a memorial to
the throne on the matter and accordingly honored the grave as “the grave
of a righteous woman.”
63
A Southern Song (1127–1279) version of the story transforms the two lovers
into a pair of butterﬂies ﬂuttering over the gravesite.64 The story later spread
widely, taking different forms in various entertainment media; modern exam-
ples include the Sichuan opera play Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai (Liuyin ji)
and the Huangmei opera play by the same title. 
In the Shengxian opera version premiered in Shanghai in the winter of
1919, Zhu Yingtai, disguised as a man, meets Liang Shanbo at Straw Bridge,
outside of Hangzhou, on her way to school in the city. The two young
students are so taken with each other at their ﬁrst meeting that they imme-
diately become sworn brothers. They then study and live in the same room
for three years without Shanbo ever suspecting Yingtai’s true sex. Upon leav-
ing for home, Yingtai secretly asks the teacher’s wife to arrange a marriage
between her and Shanbo. Soon after Yingtai returns home, however, her
father accepts a request from a certain wealthy Ma family and betroths
her to Ma Wencai. When Shanbo ﬁnally arrives with his request for mar-
riage, Yingtai can only promise to be with him in their next life. Returning
The Origins of Yue Opera    49

=== PDF PAGE 71 ===

home, Shanbo soon dies of lovesickness. On her way to Ma’s house on
the wedding day, Yingtai stops to pray in front of Shanbo’s tombstone,
and when it opens up in response to her prayers, she jumps in to join him.
Ma Wencai tries to hold her back, only to be dragged into the tomb along
with her, and the two go thereafter to the court of the underworld. Check-
ing the book of life and death, the King of the Underworld ﬁnds that Shanbo
and Yingtai are actually the Golden Boy and the Jade Girl who serve the
Jade Emperor in heaven. The Jade Emperor had sent them down to earth
to experience a few cycles of incarnation, and they have just completed
the last reincarnation. The king accordingly sends the two back to the Jade
Emperor and returns Ma W encai to earth, where he marries his own pre-
destined bride.
65
The play’s highlights came in four separate acts: “Eighteen-LiFarewell”
(Shibali xiangsong), “Remembering the Eighteen-Li Farewell” (Hui shiba),
“Meeting at Yingtai’s Chamber” (Loutai hui), and “Yingtai Crying at
Shanbo’s Bier” (Yingtai kuling). In “Eighteen-Li Farewell,” Liang Shanbo sees
Zhu Yingtai off as she heads home, accompanying her for eighteen li
(roughly six miles). Along the way, she tries to reveal her true sex and her
love for him by invoking eighteen metaphors of love, including ﬂowers,
butterﬂies, mandarin ducks, the story of the Cowherd and the Girl Weaver,
monks and nuns, and the hall of the bodhisattva Guanyin where young
couples pray for sons. Yingtai cannot keep herself from expressing her
feelings for Shanbo before they depart. But, as a well-educated woman,
she knows how a proper lady must carry herself, and as a young girl, she
is also too shy to express her love and desire in a straightforward manner.
“Eighteen-Li Farewell” captures Yingtai’s dilemma and beautifully illustrates
the young girl’s grace and complex psychology, a mixture of desire, pas-
sion, shyness, determination, and intelligence. “Remembering the Eight-
een-Li Farewell” is a solo act in which Liang, having learned from the
teacher’s wife about Yingtai’s true identity and her wish to marry him, leaves
school for the Zhu Family Village (Zhujia Zhuang) to ask for Yingtai’s hand
in marriage. As he encounters familiar scenes along the way, a happy Liang
Shanbo recalls the eighteen metaphors Yingtai used to hint at her love for
him. “Meeting at Yingtai’s Chamber” and “Crying at Shanbo’s Bier” depict
the lovers’ passion and desperation. 
The rich local oral tradition was most inﬂuential in the development of
the Shengxian opera play. According to the recollections of veteran
actors, “Eighteen-Li Farewell” and “Meeting at Yingtai’s Chamber,” the two
most popular acts, took shape in Shengxian story-singing as early as the
50 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 72 ===

late nineteenth century. When Shengxian story-singing was turned into
opera in the early twentieth century, these two acts were staged as inde-
pendent pieces. It was not until the winter of 1919 in Shanghai, however,
that the parts were united into an integral whole as described above.
66 In
this early version of the play, folk superstitions, Daoist heavens, Buddhist
notions of reincarnation, and peasant forms of sexually suggestive gestures
and lighthearted ﬂirtation are mixed with love motifs alluding to the May
Fourth rhetoric of women’s liberation and free love. Despite these mixed
messages, the story of the butterﬂy lovers was best known in the early
Republican era as a popular celebration of love and loyalty. 
With these additions to its repertoire, the all-male Shengxian opera expe-
rienced a golden age in the 1920s. The rise of little opera in Shanghai was
coterminous with the decline of Shaoxing major opera. As the native say-
ing of the time put it: “The little brother defeated the big brother.” In 1923,
Shengxian little opera was performed at four permanent theaters, and by
1925, the number of venues had increased to more than ﬁfteen, including
amusement parks, large teahouses, native-place halls, inn lobbies, and new-
style theaters. During the same period, the number of theaters that staged
Shaoxing major opera declined from four to two.
67 Upon its initial success,
little opera began to call itself “Shaoxing civil opera” (Shaoxing wenxi), claim-
ing thereby to be the representative opera from Shaoxing prefecture, of
which Shengxian was a part. The term “civil opera” (wenxi) indicates little
opera’s emphasis on love stories and the fact that love drama, not military
romance—a particular strong point of Shaoxing major opera—was what
made little opera popular in Shanghai. 
Changing Gender Norms and Girls’ Opera Schools
Sometime in the 1930s, the term “women’s Shaoxing civil opera” (nüzi Shao -
xing wenxi ) began to appear frequently in advertisements, posters, and
prints. Then, in the 1940s, “women’s Yue opera”, or simply “Yue opera,”
became the standard name for this newcomer to the Shanghai opera scene,
signaling the coming of age of all-female Shengxian opera troupes and the
passing of all-male troupes. The sudden rise of women’s Shengxian opera
and the disappearance of male actors around 1938 have been a mystery in
Yue opera history and in the history of modern Chinese opera more gen-
erally. Moreover, that Yue opera was the only genre to evolve into an all-
female theater, and one of the most popular theaters in modern China, begs
for historical explanation. The ofﬁcial Shanghai Yue Opera Gazetteer (Shang-
The Origins of Yue Opera    51

=== PDF PAGE 73 ===

hai Yueju zhi) devotes only one sentence to the decline of all-male troupes:
“As actors became older and lacked successors, all-male troupes eventually
declined and were ﬁnally displaced by all-female troupes.”
68 Evidence sug-
gests that men’s Shengxian opera lost ground to women’s opera on both
artistic and institutional fronts. As the artistic transformation of Shengxian
opera and the advantage of the all-female cast in this process are discussed
in the next chapter, this chapter addresses the institutional aspect, focus-
ing on girls’ opera schools and changing gender norms in performance art
in general. 
The entrance of women into the entertainment market had a dramatic
impact on gender arrangement in theatrical art in the early Republican
period. In 1914, only two years after the founding of the republic, female
performers made a powerful appearance in China’s ﬁrst modern theater,
“new drama” (xinju or wenmingxi), which was imported from the West via
Japan and prospered in China as “family drama” ( jiating ju) and “live news
drama” (huobao ju). Among some thirty new-drama companies, at least six
were all female.
69 The all-female companies represented a break from the
late Qing tradition of male-dominated theater but perpetuated the use of
single-sex casts onstage. 
Sex desegregation in theatrical arts was taking place in more traditional
revues, ﬁrst as a way of returning to a cross-gender acting tradition. In Shang-
hai’s foreign settlements, women had begun performing Suzhou story-
singing and “Shanghai storytelling” (bentan) in teahouses and Beijing opera
in the late nineteenth century.
70 During the early Republican period, women
performers became popular and fashionable; they took on both male and
female roles and acted onstage with male as well as female partners. Cross-
gender performance was common at the time for male and female actors.
71
Gender-straight performance was ﬁrst established in elite spoken drama
in 1923. A coterie of avant-garde intellectuals, dissatisﬁed with the com-
mercial and vulgar qualities of the new drama, formed the Popular The-
atrical Association (Dazhong Jushe) in Shanghai in the early 1920s. The
devotees called their new spoken drama “amateur theater” (aimeiju); the term
uses a phonetic transliteration of the English word “amateur,” rendered in
Chinese characters that mean “love of beauty” (aimei ) so as to emphasize
its noncommercial character. These Western-inﬂuenced intellectuals con-
sidered single-sex theaters and cross-gender acting embarrassingly unreal-
istic and thought traditional theater’s formulaic style was old-fashioned and
feudal. In an effort to modernize Chinese theater, intellectuals adopted the
52 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 74 ===

Western realistic mode of acting and initiated a gender-straight acting sys-
tem by which men and women played the roles of their own sex. In 1923,
the director and playwright Hong Shen staged Marriage: A Lifelong Commit-
ment (Zhongsheng dashi), Hu Shi’s inﬂuential May Fourth adaptation of
Ibsen’s A Doll’s House, with a gender-straight cast. The next year, Hong Shen
presented another gender-straight production, Oscar Wilde’s Lady Winder -
mere’s Fan, which became one of the most frequently performed plays of the
time.
72
During the ensuing decades, the elite practice of gender-straight act -
ing was to become the rule for all Chinese theaters, and although cross-
gender performances continued to exist in various native operas, the
practice became marginalized. Even Beijing opera could not escape when
new generations of actresses eventually took over women’s roles. Yue opera,
like other native forms, freely adopted a variety of gender arrangements,
from gender-straight to cross-gender and from single- to mixed-gender
modes of acting. Signiﬁcantly, when most native operas eventually were
transmuted into gender-straight theaters, Yue opera evolved into a theater
dominated by all-female troupes. Thus, the spectrum of possible gender
arrangements displayed on Republican Shanghai’s stage may be seen as a
response to the rise of female performers and audiences, with women’s Yue
opera being a radical representative of this modern transition. Women’s
opera was, therefore, an exception in a general move toward gender-straight
acting, one that proved the rule of the feminization of performing arts in
the modern age. If the preference for gender-straight acting was much
inﬂuenced by the West, then the rise of women’s opera was evidence of
various native and traditional inﬂuences in the shaping of China’s modern
theater. 
Women’s Yue opera was deeply connected with a cultural legacy of the
region—the “all-girls training schools/troupes” ( nü ban, also nü xiand nü yue),
a tradition peculiar to the Jiangnan area that dated back to at least the Ming
dynasty. The prosperous late Ming and early Qing literati in Jiangnan were
fond of opera, and it was just as fashionable for men of means to train and
keep private opera troupes as it was to build private scholars’ gardens. Many
of the best private troupes, such as those owned by Zhu Yunlai and Yu Shui-
wen, consisted of women only.
73 During the late nineteenth century, after
the government prohibited adult women performers, all-girls opera troupes,
known as mao’erxi (lit., “children’s opera”), emerged. The all-girls opera fea-
tured girls mostly in their early teens performing all roles in a highly pro-
The Origins of Yue Opera    53

=== PDF PAGE 75 ===

fessional manner, and the performers were known to be especially skilled
in acrobatic ﬁghting. All-girls opera enjoyed great popularity for a few
decades and then disappeared completely by the end of the 1920s, when
adult actresses reappeared in great numbers.
74 In the early 1920s, however,
a combination of the popularity of female performers, all-girls opera troupes,
and men’s Shengxian opera seems to have inspired the idea of a girls’ Sheng-
xian opera.
75
In 1923, a man by the name of Wang Jinshui, a Shengxian merchant
sojourning in Shanghai, decided to create an all-girls Shengxian opera school
in his hometown in order to prepare the girls for Shanghai’s market.
76 Wang
had been in the theater business for some years and had recently become
manager of the Shengping Theater in Shanghai, one of the major theaters
featuring all-male Shengxian opera. With three hundred silver dollars, Wang
started an all-girls training school in early 1923 in Shi’s Village (Shijia Ao),
a poor village located in a mountainous area. Residents greeted him with
suspicion, however.
77 Older moral imperatives and customs held sway there,
and local people voiced a long-standing bias against the “three zi”: “actors”
(xizi), “soldiers” (liangzi), and “prostitutes” (biaozi). Taking up acting, they felt,
was bad enough for men, let alone for women. Wang, however, had such
conﬁdence in Shanghai’s lucrative market that he was determined to carry
out his plan. He ﬁrst recruited his daughter and his niece to demonstrate
that he was serious and promised an attractive package for the students: free
room and board and a gold ring, a dress, a pair of leather shoes, and one
hundred silver dollars after three years of apprenticeship. In three months,
Wang recruited about two dozen girls between the ages of nine and thir-
teen; daughters of peasants, artisans, and rural opera actors accounted for
the majority of the apprentices, and many were family members, relatives,
and neighbors of Wang and the instructors.
78
Instruction began in the early summer. The school hired three teach-
ers, all retired actors. Most girls were illiterate and had no previous act-
ing experience, but they were nonetheless able to endure the arduous
training program. The school safeguarded the girls’ well-being in general,
since most students had close ties to the men in charge, but the strict train-
ing program had the girls working day and night. Students got up early
for physical ﬁtness training before breakfast. Then they studied scripts and
memorized parts of plays. In the afternoon, they studied performance skills
until dark, and diligent students rehearsed additional work on their own
by moonlight. The curriculum consisted of three basic training courses:
“acrobatics” (wugong), “singing” (changgong), and “posture” (zuogong). Along
54 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 76 ===

with their basic training, they learned and memorized several plays. By
the end of the third month, Wang was ready to put the girls onstage for
a formal rehearsal.
79
The ﬁrst rehearsal was held in the open space in front of the school.
The temporary stage was made up of several planks. The performance
featured a costume play, A Pair of Pearly Phoenixes(Shuang zhu feng), a typ-
ical scholar-beauty love story, which begins with Wen Bizheng, a secondary-
degree holder from Luoyang, seeing Huo Dingjin, the beautiful daughter
of a high ofﬁcial, on his visit to a temple. He immediately falls in love but
has no way to approach her. Wen goes off to a village to consult a go-
between, and there he falls in love again, this time with the go-between’s
daughter. The go-between manages to sell Wen to the ofﬁcial’s house-
hold as a slave-servant. While there, he ﬁnds an opportunity to meet the
young lady he had seen at the temple and reveals his true identity and his
love for her. At the end, Wen restores his status and happily marries both
women. Although the stage and costumes were simple and the acting
lacked sophistication, the villagers responded positively to the girls’
efforts.
80
Wang soon exhausted his initial investment of three hundred silver dol-
lars and was eager to test the market in Shanghai. Early in winter 1923, he
took his troupe to Shanghai and put on a show at the Shengping Theater.
But the result could not have been further from the success he dreamed of.
Three months of training proved insufﬁcient, as the girls appeared tech-
nically inadequate as well as shy and immature. After few more tries per-
forming without success at teahouses in Shanghai and Hangzhou, Wang
brought the troupe back to Shengxian in spring 1924.
81
The villagers welcomed the girls back with great enthusiasm. That the
children had performed in Shanghai gave them a certain cachet in the minds
of the villagers. The clansmen even deﬁed rules and opened the stage inside
Shenwu Hall, the Shi lineage hall, for the girls’ homecoming show. The
whole village was exhilarated. In the past, Shi’s Village had not had the
resources to invite opera companies; now the village had its own opera
troupe, and the native daughters put on shows for the community free of
charge. Villagers invited relatives and friends from other locations and even
slaughtered domestic animals so that there would be sufﬁcient provisions
to treat their guests. On the day of the show, Shenwu Hall was packed
with enthusiastic peasants. The program consisted of typical scholar-beauty
love stories, including A Pair of Pearly Phoenixes , A Pair of Jade Bracelets (Yu
lianhuan), and Pearl Pagoda. The girls were also excited. They had become
The Origins of Yue Opera    55

=== PDF PAGE 77 ===

more experienced during their several months of performing in big cities,
and the warm and eager welcome they received helped mitigate any resid-
ual shyness. The girls put on a bold and lively performance and greatly
pleased the audience. The troupe then performed a few successful shows
in nearby towns.
82
In the autumn of 1924, the school undertook a long-distance tour in
the eastern Zhejiang countryside. On land, they traveled by foot, but most
of the journey was on water, by raft and “riverboats covered with black
awning” (wupeng chuan). Such tours became routine over the next few years.
In 1927, when the school’s four-year contract with the students expired,
Wang turned the school into a professional troupe, adopting a salary sys-
tem that put the leading actresses at the top of the payroll. By the late
1920s, the ﬁrst all-girls Shengxian opera troupe had become a ﬁxture in
Shaoxing and had acquired name recognition in Ningbo and Hangzhou,
replacing the declining all-girls Beijing opera.
83 The popularity of three
leading actresses, known as “the three ﬂowers” (san hua)—Shi Yinhua and
Zhao Ruihua, who specialized in young female roles, and Tu Xinghua, who
specialized in young male roles—marked the commercial success of the
girls’ Shengxian opera troupe. A 1927 article in the Shaoxing Evening News
(Shaoxing wanbao) noted: “[The girls] performed in the Juemin Theater.
Shi Yinhua and others already had great marketing power to attract audi-
ences. The audience was reluctant to leave after the show was over, and
the opera got a nickname, diaojiaoxi [lit., ‘the opera you are not able to
walk away from’]. Shi Yinhua’s salary was as high as nine hundred yuan
[per month].”
84 In 1929, the ﬁrst all-girls troupe came to a glorious end
when the actresses left the troupe one by one for marriage. Among the
ﬁrst to leave, in 1928, was Shi Yinhua, who married the son of a rich fam-
ily in the market town of Chongren. Wang Jinshui took the remaining
twelve girls back to Shi’s Village, where rural people had long been await-
ing the troupe’s return. During the troupe’s last year of operation, people
from near and far came to Shi’s Village to contract with Wang to bring
the troupe to their villages and towns. In one incident, the owner of a cloth
shop in the market town of Huangze sent ﬁve sedan chairs to bring the
actresses to perform at his mother’s birthday celebration. The troupe trav-
eled, or rather paraded, about twenty-ﬁve miles in sedan chairs, stopping
to perform at several places and creating a sensation along the way. The
troupe’s splendid end instilled a dream in the minds of many young girls
and also effectively demonstrated to the country folk that being an actress
might not be such a bad idea after all.
85
56 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 78 ===

All-girls schools proliferated, however, only in the 1930s when the Great
Depression began to take a toll on China’s silk economy. Shanghai and
Zhejiang, with silk industries closely linked to the international market,
were hit hard. Sericulture and the silk industry had been an important part
of Zhejiang’s economy for centuries. The northern Zhejiang area (mainly
the Hangzhou-Jiaxing-Huzhou plain) was the leader in the province’s silk
industry, supported by eastern Zhejiang’s sericulture and cheap labor.
Shengxian’s mountainous terrain was unsuitable for agriculture, and as the
economy relied heavily on sericulture, the area was especially affected. In
the early 1930s, Shengxian endured a lasting depression.
86
Economic disaster impoverished local families and changed the lives of
many native daughters, inadvertently contributing to the rise of women’s
opera. Sericulture had been an important source of cash income for peasant
households in Shengxian, and peasant girls traditionally labored alongside
adult women in raising and harvesting silkworms, all the while dreaming
of becoming wageworkers in the silk mills of Hangzhou and Shanghai. The
outcome poor peasant girls most feared was being sold or given away as
child brides by desperate parents, a common practice in eastern Zhejiang’s
poor countryside. Ironically, in the face of the bankrupt rural economy, a
daughter’s cash-earning ability became increasingly important to rural fam-
ilies. All things considered, opera singing suddenly did not look like such
a bad alternative for a little girl whose family desperately needed her to
bring in cash.
87
Thus, just as a local natural disaster in the early twentieth century had
pushed the development of Shengxian little opera, so an international dis-
aster in the early 1930s resulted in the phenomenal growth of all-girls opera,
ﬁrst in Zhejiang and then in Shanghai. In 1929, a second all-girls school,
Xinxinfeng Theater, was established in Huangze township. Then, from 1930
to 1934, at least thirteen girls’ schools came into being in Huangze alone.
In Shengxian as a whole, major schools during the period between 1930
and 1937 numbered at least forty, while smaller schools were even more
numerous. Girls’ opera schools also appeared in great numbers in such nearby
counties as Xinchang, Xindeng, Lin’an, Shaoxing, Sanmen, Yuyao, and Long -
you.
88 Girls’ schools and subsequent all-female troupes vastly outnumbered
men’s Shengxian opera troupes; moreover, with their highly competitive
fees and the quality performances presented by a cluster of well-known
stars, girls’ Shengxian opera marginalized all other genres active in the prov-
ince, including the long-standing Shaoxing major opera, Hangzhou opera
(Hangju), and Beijing opera. Like men’s Shengxian opera, girls’ Shengxian
The Origins of Yue Opera    57

=== PDF PAGE 79 ===

opera was deeply rooted in the peasant culture of Zhejiang’s countryside
and bespoke the general lack of entertainment in rural life. Backed up by
the vast rural market, all-female troupes were able to test the waters at urban
centers from time to time and eventually emerged as powerful contenders
in the entertainment markets of Ningbo, Shaoxing, Wenzhou, Hangzhou,
and, ﬁnally, Shanghai. Girls’ troupes began to frequent Shanghai after 1935
and already enjoyed better market value than all-male and mixed-gender
Shengxian opera troupes. In the meantime, all-male and mixed-gender
troupes were demoralized by their declining market value and lack of new
recruits. 
The institution of the girls’ opera school was vital to the success of
women’s opera for several reasons. The school gave its students systematic
technical training in acting, singing, and acrobatic ﬁghting, a beneﬁt many
peasants who became minor-opera performers never had. The school-
trained troupe also enjoyed a strong institutional and technical structure
with a team of well-trained long-term partners in all roles, crucial for a well-
balanced troupe. Moreover, girls who lived, traveled, and worked together
for months and years developed a sense of belonging that kept them going
and overcoming all sorts of hardships in their career. Finally, the sheer num-
ber of girls’ schools and women performers overwhelmed existing male
 performers and discouraged boys from taking up acting careers, effectively
making Shengxian opera a women’s realm. 
The outbreak of the War of Resistance against Japan in 1937 gave women’s
Shengxian opera troupes one ﬁnal push toward establishing them selves per-
manently in Shanghai. In August 1937, Japanese forces attacked the city,
and the Battle of Shanghai began. It lasted for three months, and most Sheng-
xian opera troupes left Shanghai to continue their performances elsewhere.
When peace returned to the fallen city, entertainment quickly picked up
in “island” Shanghai, which became crowded with refugees from the sur-
rounding areas. On January 31,1938, the lunar New Year’s Day, the Yuesheng
Theater, the ﬁrst all-female troupe to arrive in the city after the Battle of
Shanghai, successfully staged a performance at the Commercial Inn (Tong-
shang Lüguan), a hostel owned by a Shengxian native where many sojourn-
ers from Zhejiang congregated. Within two months, the troupe moved to
a real theater, the Old Dam Theater (Laozha Xiyuan), where an enthusi-
astic audience ﬁlled the three hundred seats. On the day of the Lantern
Festival (the ﬁfteenth day after the lunar New Year), another all-female
troupe arrived and performed at the Shanghai Little Theater. In April came
58 The Origins of Yue Opera

=== PDF PAGE 80 ===

the third troupe, which performed at the Empire Theater. Encouraged by
the success of these pioneers, more troupes and actresses followed suit; as
women’s troupes moved into the city one by one, male performers and all-
male Shengxian opera disappeared from the scene.
89 Within a few years,
women’s Shengxian opera had managed to become the city’s most popu-
lar theater, while creating a distinctly women’s culture in the city’s public
space. 
The Origins of Yue Opera    59

=== PDF PAGE 81 ===

Chapter 2
The Rise of Feminine Opera
The story of women’s Yue opera is primarily a story about the actresses.
At the beginning of 1938, when the historical stage was set for the rise of
women’s Yue opera in Shanghai, it was the many young peasant girls from
Shengxian who made it happen, but not without casualties.
It was February 21, 1942. In a funeral parlor at 838 Xujiahui Road in the
former French concession, people from all over Shanghai came to watch
the funeral ceremony for Ma Zhanghua, a twenty-one-year-old women’s
Yue opera star. Ma died of tuberculosis, but rumor attributed her illness to
melancholy brought on by slanderous allegations of promiscuity. It was
commonly believed that the slander was spread by Lu Gendi, boss of the
Dalai Theater where Ma performed, in angry response to Ma’s recent mar-
riage and retirement. 
Five years later, when another tragic death of a popular Yue opera star,
Xiao Dangui, captured the headlines, some twenty thousand Yue opera fans
crashed the Leyuan Funeral House, where the funeral ceremony was held.
Xiao had committed suicide when her boss Zhang Chunfan accused her
of having an affair with her male director. Xiao had lived with Zhang for
many years, ostensibly as a concubine. Before she committed suicide, Xiao
Dangui is reported to have stated to a friend: “My body is pure and clean”
(Wode shenti shi qingbai de).
1 This statement reminded the public of the
suicide of Ruan Lingyu, a popular movie star, which occurred in 1935, also
amid a sexual scandal.
Ruan Lingyu’s suicide was one of the ﬁrst instances in modern Chinese
history of a famous actress’s tragic death becoming a topic of widespread
public interest. Ruan’s personal life became the subject of gossip when her
60


=== PDF PAGE 82 ===

ex-husband ﬁled a lawsuit against her and her second husband, accusing
them of adultery and of misappropriating his property. Newspapers pub-
lished stories portraying Ruan as a playgirl who had abandoned her ex-
husband for a wealthier man. On March 8, 1935, International Women’s
Day, one day before she was scheduled to appear in court, Ruan commit-
ted suicide, stating in a suicide note: “Gossip is frightening” (Renyan kewei),
and “I cannot wipe out the wrong done to me if I do not die.”
2
Public fascination with the lives and deaths of actresses involved in
“peach-colored news” (taose xinwen), or sexual scandals, was common to the
cultural scene of Republican era Shanghai. Gossip, as well as reports on
actresses’ personal lives, ﬁlled the pages of tabloids and mainstream news-
papers, feeding the curiosity of a large urban public. Subject to such expo-
sure, actresses often went out of their way to defend their good name and,
sometimes, died for it. If Ruan Lingyu’s statement that “Gossip is fright-
ening” was a protest against the public’s scrutiny of her personal life, then
Xiao Dangui’s qingbai (purity and cleanliness), the description she applied
to her body, represented a moral quality that actresses wished to cultivate
as their public image.
The concept of qingbai, as a moral imperative of female bodily practice,
was derived from a Confucian discourse on female chastity prevalent dur-
ing the Ming and Qing dynasties. It was commonly used to describe women
of good families, but rarely, if ever, public women who worked as prosti-
tutes or entertainers.
3 The gender system during the Ming–Qing periods
formally restricted a woman’s role to provider of reproductive and sexual
services to men, while a corollary concept of chastity valued female bod-
ily purity as opposed to promiscuity. The virtuous woman remained in the
inner chambers, her body belonging only to her husband; public women
who offered sexual services and entertainment as consumable goods were
at the other end of the spectrum. Yet, even among public women, there
was a moral hierarchy structured according to the criterion of chastity. It
is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd, for example, literary descriptions of morally supe-
rior courtesans who remained loyal to the dynasty and faithful to their literati
lovers.
4 Since qingbai was traditionally reserved for certain categories of
women, a woman’s capacity to invoke this notion became a mark of her
high social status in itself. In the 1930s and 1940s, however, female public
entertainers became increasingly concerned with the idea of qingbai. Some
even died after having been accused of being unchaste. This raises several
questions: How did the notion of qingbai become central to the public image
of the actress, a woman considered marginal in traditional social hierar-
The Rise of Feminine Opera    61

=== PDF PAGE 83 ===

chies? What social and cultural conditions of the Republican period ren-
dered qingbai a desirable virtue for public women? And how did this notion
affect the construction of women’s Yue opera?
During the Republican period, actresses were caught up in the cultural
conﬂict between traditional popular eroticism focused on the sexuality of
public women and a reformist ideology that considered the cleansing of
this popular eroticism to be part of the task of building a modern nation.
The new ideology, which called for a redeﬁnition of women’s social role
in general, required that women in theater be redeﬁned as art workers who
would move audiences to contemplate the well-being of the nation, instead
of sexual objects indulging viewers with titillating entertainment. This cul-
tural conﬂict was intensiﬁed by the emergence of mass media that provided
a public domain in which the city’s culture was being formed and re-formed. 
The actress was a new type of woman born in the Republican period,
an era with the slogan of women’s liberation painted on its banner.
Although, historically, there had been numerous female public entertainers,
the Qing state adopted a strict Confucian gender ideology and excluded
women from public entertainment. Female performers of the early Repub-
lican period came from a wide spectrum of social backgrounds, ranging
from revolutionary new women and vocational performers to courtesans
and prostitutes. While female students acted out revolutionary ideas in the
form of Western drama, and upper-class ladies spent their time as Beijing
opera amateurs, for lower-class women entertainers, the stage, only recently
made accessible to them, presented a new opportunity to earn a living. In
the 1920s, female entertainers began to reappear in numbers in teahouses,
on stages, and on screens, adding a new category of performer to the two
traditional types of entertainers, the actor and the prostitute. Despite ter-
ritorial boundaries and sexual differences between actors and prostitutes,
both provided similar services for their male customers. While young male
actors often served as prostitutes, courtesans generally performed music
and dance as well as provided sexual services. The new female actors occu-
pied a niche between the traditional categories of male actors and female
prostitutes, but they were easily viewed as a mixture of the two. Weikun
Cheng, in his article on actresses in Republican Beijing and Tianjin, has
also noted: “Contemporaries more or less understood stage performance
by women in the early twentieth century as a form of urban amusement
associated with erotic indulgence and immoral lifestyles, and believed act-
ing to be a profession full of abuse, exploitation, and social control.”
5
Moreover, historically and also in the case of women performing in for-
62 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 84 ===

eign settlements during the late Qing period, the line separating female per-
formers and courtesans was ambiguous, as public women’s sexuality was cus-
tomarily considered part of their vocation, available for sale alongside their
other entertainment skills. The Republican rhetoric of women’s liberation
may have opened a new niche for vocational female performers, but it hardly
gave them a wholly new, ready-made social status. Centuries-old images of
female entertainers were easily invoked to deﬁne public perceptions of these
new actresses. Traditional gender-role ideas persisted as well.
The traditional consuming public’s voyeuristic gaze, which manipulated
female entertainers’ sexuality, intensiﬁed dramatically in the ﬁrst half of
the twentieth century with the emergence of mass media. Newspapers, mag-
azines, and tabloids ﬁlled Shanghai’s streets, carrying, among other things,
gossip about female stars. If female entertainers’ performances and sexual-
ity were consumable goods available only to a limited number of people
before the emergence of mass media, they were now for sale as a commodity
to a large urban audience. In a sense, the actress became an object of public
erotic fantasy whose sexuality was the business of anyone with access to
media-created gossip.
Being such a heavily eroticized commodity, the actress could not help
but feel the gaze of her fans and the tabloid-reading public in general.
Admittedly, this phenomenon is not uncommon to urban popular cultures
elsewhere. Yet it remains important to inquire into the ways in which China’s
traditional gender system yielded different expectations of actors and
actresses during the Republican period. Since the traditional Chinese fam-
ily system was polygamous, multiple sexual relationships were considered
normal for men. By contrast, women in the traditional family system were
expected to be monogamous. Thus, while actors could engage in multiple
sexual relationships without being stigmatized, the public imagined the
actress as if it were involved in a love affair with her and therefore had a
claim on her sexuality and loyalty.
6 In other words, the public paradoxi-
cally demanded chastity from its favorite actresses as it simultaneously con-
sumed their sexuality.
The public further demonstrated its gender bias in its refusal or failure
to distinguish between an actress’s stage role and her real life. While an
actress’s alleged promiscuity could ruin her reputation and her professional
career, her stage persona as an amorous character could irreversibly dam-
age her personal reputation, making her more vulnerable to slander.
Actresses who played loose characters were somehow more vulnerable to
public gossip about their personal lives than were those who played right-
The Rise of Feminine Opera    63

=== PDF PAGE 85 ===

eous roles. This pattern is evident in many cases, including those of the
three actresses whose deaths were described at the beginning of this chap-
ter: Ma Zhanghua was famous for impersonating amorous young men; Xiao
Dangui was known for playing erotic women; and Ruan Lingyu began her
screen career playing loose women, and many considered her role as a pros-
titute in The Goddess (Shen nü), released in 1933, her most successful. The
onstage persona of an actress often inﬂuenced public perception of her per-
sonality in the real world. In a sense, for the public, the actress became the
characters she performed. The actress was therefore considered a sexual
object during the early Republican period not only because of the tradi-
tional confusion between the actress and the courtesan but also because of
the sexually suggestive performances she often gave. 
These actresses, most of whom came from lower-class backgrounds and
struggled to make a living, had little control over the program and roles
they performed. The basic fact was that they were hired by their male
superiors—a boss, teacher, or employer—for the sole purpose of pleas-
ing a predominantly male audience. Thus, the relationship between the
theatrical representation of women and the alleged moral character of
actresses was embedded in a power relationship informed by class and
gender inequality. The social position of female entertainers is thus artic-
ulated by the visually based, erotic public culture prevalent in early
Republican Shanghai that made female sexuality a commodity for sale in
theaters and mass media.
This public culture of erotica was, however, challenged by a rival intel-
lectual ideology of social and cultural reform. During the early Republican
period, a reformist discourse, supported to a large extent by the National-
ist Republican government after the May Fourth period, elevated theatri-
cal performance to the status of art while degrading prostitution to the level
of a social disgrace.
7 Within this discourse, the victimized Chinese woman,
typically portrayed with bound feet and a weak body, represented the weak-
ness and suffering of the Chinese nation, while the bodies of prostitutes
and female entertainers symbolized the degradation of Chinese society.
Liberating the female body therefore became a central metaphor of a Chi-
nese revolution aimed at transforming the old society and building a wealthy
and powerful modern nation.
8 The bound female body had to be emanci-
pated in order to make healthy women, who would then plant the seeds
of a healthy nation. Traditional eroticism, materialized in the bodies of pros-
titutes and female entertainers, in theaters and in print, had to be suppressed
so that public morality could be attained.
64 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 86 ===

Moreover, the theater itself became a vehicle by which enlightened intel-
lectuals could educate the masses with messages of reform and modernity.
Intellectuals in the early twentieth century experimented with spoken drama
and initiated theatrical reform in Beijing opera. They scripted, directed,
performed, and produced plays in both new and traditional theaters; many
made a name for themselves as performing artists, the most famous being
Ouyang Yuqian, Hong Shen, and Yu Shangyuan.
9 Intellectuals’ participa-
tion in the theater enhanced the status of theatrical performance and exem-
pliﬁed the ideal of the Republican actor who not only entertained the
like-minded with pure art but also enlightened the masses with messages
of national salvation and social reform. Thus, although actors in the past
were placed in the same debased social category as prostitutes, a reformist
discourse now elevated these performers to full social status, while reduc-
ing prostitutes to the level of a social disgrace. 
The actress thus occupied a particularly ambivalent position between
vocational actors, who were striving to achieve higher social status as pro-
fessional artists, and prostitutes, whose livelihood still depended on sell-
ing sexual services. As a commercial performer who needed to make a living,
the actress had to seek favor from a general audience. Yet, at the same time,
she had to reject the public’s voyeuristic gaze, habitually cast on the tra-
ditional female entertainer, which dragged her down to the prostitute’s level.
She was caught between the conﬂicting demands of a public culture of erot-
ica, which viewed her as a sexual object, and a reformist discourse that would
grant her social status only if she could clearly distinguish herself from the
prostitute. 
Ruan Lingyu’s suicide in 1935 and the media event around it illustrate
the dilemma of the Republican actress and the environment Yue opera
actresses were discovering. Ruan Lingyu entered China’s young ﬁlm indus-
try in the mid-1920s. The daughter of a poor commoner family that had
barely been able to put her through middle school, Ruan grew up with the
industry under the guidance of her directors. She began her career playing
prostitutes and “loose women” in ﬁlms such as the 1927 A Nominal Couple
(Guaming de fuqi), directed by Pu Wancang. During the early period, sen-
sational themes dominated the ﬁlm industry, but with the establishment
of Lianhua Studio in 1929, a group of reform-oriented directors and screen-
writers shifted to new themes of social-realistic critique. The ﬁlm industry,
as a form of modern art, was then much inﬂuenced by reformist intellec-
tuals in the 1930s. Perhaps because of her lowly family background, Ruan
Lingyu responded positively to the reform rhetoric. In 1932, she success-
The Rise of Feminine Opera    65

=== PDF PAGE 87 ===

fully played the role of a factory worker in Three Modern Women (Sange
modeng nüxing), directed by Pu Wancang. Over the next two years, she
continued to create images of new women in several other movies. Her
last role, in The New Woman(Xin nüxing), directed by Cai Chusheng, was that
of a progressive journalist who was slandered by the tabloids and ultimately
committed suicide. Ruan’s best performance was arguably in the 1933 ﬁlm
The Goddess(Shen nü), directed by Wu Yonggang, in which she played a young
woman forced into prostitution, after being abandoned by her boy friend
and rejected by family and society, in order to provide for her son’s edu-
cation. Her sympathetic portrayal of the prostitute illustrated the reformist
construction of “the prostitute” and presented a criticism of the social sys-
tem that produced such unfortunate women.
10
From A Nominal Couple to The New Woman, Ruan’s popularity increased;
her art matured, and she became a superstar in Shanghai’s ﬁlm culture. A
pioneer in creating images of new women on-screen, Ruan began to
develop the identity of the professional artist—a female artist who had
emerged from the murky milieu of prostitution to become a new woman.
At the same time, however, gossip about her two marriages and her ex-
husband’s lawsuit against her became a familiar feature in tabloid and news-
paper headlines. Tabloid writers, irritated by the criticism of tabloid
journalism in The New Woman, took revenge on Ruan by producing even
more damaging gossip. Somehow, she came to be portrayed as a loose
woman who lived with or abandoned men for their money, and who did
not care about formally marrying either of her two husbands. These sto-
ries created a sensation among movie fans and sold well to the tabloid-read-
ing public. Shanghai’s shining star fell into moral disgrace. Certainly, her
court appearance, scheduled for March 9, 1935, would have created an even
bigger stir in the mass media. But in the early morning of March 8, Inter-
national Women’s Day, Ruan swallowed an overdose of sleeping pills. On
that very day, most of which she spent barely alive in hospital emergency
rooms, she had been scheduled to meet with a group of middle-school girls
to talk about the meaning of Women’s Day and how to become a new
woman. She died later that day.
Ruan’s death shocked the public. A sense of loss and sympathy for her
dominated public attention and sparked a debate on who was responsible
for her death. Seizing the opportunity, Shanghai’s sympathetic liberal intel-
lectuals launched an attack on the public culture of erotica, blaming a vul-
gar tabloid culture and old-fashioned gender biases for Ruan’s death.
Throughout the debate, liberal intellectuals represented Ruan Lingyu as
66 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 88 ===

not only a typical suffering Chinese woman victimized by a lingering feu-
dal culture but also a talented artist who exempliﬁed a new professional-
ism among actresses. “Ruan Lingyu’s death was not a suicide but a murder,”
one writer asserted. “The gun that killed her may have been made of Zhang
Damin’s [her ex-husband] lawsuit and Tang Jishan’s [her second husband]
deception. But the ones who pulled the trigger were China’s backward (not
progressive) audience members, the old feudal society, and the restora-
tionists who preached the return of the ghost of Lady Meng Jiang
11 urged
concubines to follow a deceased husband by killing themselves, and cursed
women who remarried.”
12
Another commentator pointed out that Ruan’s death was a tragedy char-
acteristic of the age, an age of transition. Living in this transitional age, Ruan
was a victim of lingering feudal values, stigmatized by her remarriage and
alleged loose lifestyle, and a victim of capitalist materialism, betrayed by
her own material desires and seduced by Tang’s wealth. Perhaps more impor-
tant, the author went on, Ruan herself was in a process of spiritual transi-
tion. Just before her death, she had become enlightened through her
participation in social-realistic ﬁlms. This new consciousness created tremen-
dous tension between old and new within her, and, according to this com-
mentator, her weak character failed in trying to deal with the assault of
external forces and inﬂuences.
13 For Lu Xun and Cai Chusheng, director of
The New Woman,in which Ruan had played her last role, it was the “obscene
tabloid press” (huangse xiaobao) that stigmatized Ruan in the public eye and
thereby killed a defenseless woman and a brilliant artist.14
These comments represent the liberal intellectuals’ admonition of public
morality and their reconstruction of the public woman. Reformist discourse
linked the tasks of delivering the actress from the sexual gaze and turning
her into a new professional woman, making them into one process. The-
oretically, the reformist ideology that included the actor while excluding
the prostitute opened the door to full social status for the actress, as long
as her cause was to change the old culture. In reality, however, only when
the actress could establish herself in the public eye as no nü xizi, the pejo-
rative term for the traditional female entertainer/prostitute, would she be
considered worthy by the reformist cause. 
The actress’s social status was therefore shaped largely by her public per-
sona, and it was in this context that qingbai, or purity and cleanliness, as a
moral description of strict female bodily practice became central to the
actress who strove for high social status. The term qingbai became a trope
describing an actress’s morality and hence signiﬁed her relation to the
The Rise of Feminine Opera    67

=== PDF PAGE 89 ===

reformist cause. The ability of an actress to appropriate this term became
crucial to her professional career as an art worker as opposed to a tradi-
tional female entertainer. Failure to appropriate this term could sometimes
be fatal, as the deaths of these three actresses testify. 
Building a public persona of qingbai , however, required the actress not
only to restrict her sexual conduct in her personal life but also to perform
the idea of qingbai onstage. Although the two were related, the stage per-
formance had more inﬂuence in constructing an actress’s public persona,
probably because stage performance was the most direct form of commu-
nication between the actress and the public. Thus, while Ruan Lingyu’s
vulnerability to tabloid attacks on her personal life stemmed to a large extent
from her earlier loose-woman roles, the re-creation of Ruan Lingyu as a
model new woman and artist after her death was also grounded primarily
on the pro-reform new female images she had created on-screen. Performing
qingbai thus became the focal point at which the actress’s need to build her
pure and clean public persona converged with the reformist cause of remak-
ing the theater into an educational tool for nation building and a showcase
of modernity.
This complex relationship among reform discourse, a public culture of
erotica, and the actress’s struggle for survival and status produced a dilemma
that many actresses would not survive. But this situation was also an oppor-
tunity for the actress to rise out of the social and cultural gutter. The con-
cept of qingbai as a traditional moral imperative of women’s bodily practice
had dogged many public women, but, for others, it also provided a strate-
gic weapon they could use to improve their social status. Performing qing-
bai onstage, in the printed media, and in real life helped the actress preempt
public fantasy about her sexuality, fend off unwanted sexual advances from
men, distinguish herself from traditional female entertainers or prostitutes,
and ultimately join with the mainstream reformist cause. 
The concept of qingbai indeed played a crucial role in the rise of women’s
Yue opera in Republican Shanghai. During the 1930s and 1940s, an axiom
circulated among Yue opera actresses: “Carry yourself pure and clean; per-
form honestly and earnestly” (Qing qing bai bai zuoren; ren ren zhen zhen
yanxi). With this axiom, in the course of two generations of Yue opera
actresses, a “traditional” lowbrow form was reshaped by modern conditions,
and the traditional female entertainer was transformed into the legitimate
public ﬁgure of the art worker. Although this dual process took place to
varying degrees in many other minor-opera forms, including Shanghai opera
and Huai opera, women’s Yue opera, because it was an all-woman theater
68 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 90 ===

and greatly popular, most clearly illustrates the actress’s struggle during this
period of transition and the ways in which it informed the re-formation of
modern Shanghai’s public culture. 
Yue Opera Actresses in the 1930s
In the 1930s,Yue opera actresses appeared to many as young peasant girls
performing curious little shows to entertain a carefree metropolitan audi-
ence. The opera was becoming increasingly popular, especially as more
women began to attend, but Yue opera’s status did not compare to that of
Beijing opera and spoken drama. Beijing opera was honored in reformist
discourse as the national opera that symbolized a national cultural heritage.
15
Its patrons were largely members of elites, including government ofﬁcials,
military ofﬁcers, businessmen, and intellectuals, while the famous Beijing
opera stars, such as Mei Lanfang and Zhou Xinfang, were no longer mere
actors in the traditional meaning of the word. These stars were enthroned
as “artists,” and they were also capitalists, in the sense that both owned their
own companies; Zhou also held a long-term lease on one of the best the-
aters in Shanghai, the Grand Golden Theater (Huangjin Daxiyuan). Spo-
ken drama was basically a theater by and for intellectuals. Women’s Yue
opera, in contrast, a theater by women and increasingly for women, was
of marginal signiﬁcance to male elites and was neglected by mainstream
newspapers, intellectuals, and art critics.
The comparative status of the performers was similarly unbalanced. Yue
opera’s women were, in the eyes of the cultural elite, not artists but tradi-
tional entertainers earning a living. Most women’s Yue opera actresses started
in their early teens as apprentices at a training school.
16 During the appren-
ticeship, they received only meager stipends in addition to room and board.
At the end of their apprenticeships, the school often turned into a com-
pany, and the girls became employees of the company owner. The owner
paid the actresses small salaries and pocketed whatever fees he received
from contracting with theaters in Shanghai and Zhejiang for performances.
Toward the end of the 1930s, as large numbers of actresses emerged from
training schools and women’s Yue opera became a regular feature in the-
aters everywhere in the region, theater owners began to contract directly
with actresses, replacing company owners and taking on the role of bosses.
The traditional “company system” (xiban) was replaced by a system in which
the theater owner took control of his own performing team by contract-
ing with individual actresses for ﬁxed salaries over a half-year period. The
The Rise of Feminine Opera    69

=== PDF PAGE 91 ===

company was therefore no longer a ﬁnancially independent entity but was
on the theater owner’s payroll.17 Companies were organized around a few
leading actresses, by the stars or by the theater boss, but few actresses had
their own theaters and none owned her own company.
18
Earning a livelihood was hard work for most Yue opera actresses, per-
haps harder than for actors in Beijing opera and other traditional major operas.
For one thing, unlike many Beijing opera actors, who inherited family tra-
ditions or had relatives in the vocation, most Yue opera actresses came from
poor peasant families and had few family connections in opera circles. As
ﬁrst-generation immigrants from the countryside of Shengxian, Yue opera
actresses also lacked family support in the metropolis. Most of them scraped
by on low salaries, sending the little they could save back to their families
in Shengxian. Those who managed to put together sizable savings usually
brought their families—parents, siblings, and close relatives—to Shanghai.
In order to provide for their families, they often pushed themselves to the
limit. Yue opera theater, unlike Beijing opera, which usually had only night
shows, offered matinee as well as evening performances every day, and each
show regularly lasted three or four hours. This put actresses on a tight sched-
ule and left them little time for other activities, such as going to night school
or socializing. The majority of actresses were illiterate, while the most
schooled among them could be considered only semiliterate (though many
eventually learned enough to do some simple reading and writing).
19 Many
actresses slept backstage in the theater for years after they arrived in Shang-
hai, in part to save rent but also because they generally did not know any-
one who could take them in.
20
This lack of social support networks, shortage of economic resources,
and low literacy severely limited actresses’ cultural and political horizons
and left them with little power to negotiate with various social elements,
such as theater bosses, hooligans, and tabloid reporters. Theater bosses,
many of whom had ties to secret societies or were local bullies themselves,
were the most powerful controlling element in an actress’s life. Often,
actresses were more than employees to their bosses; their bodies and pri-
vate lives might also be subject to the control of these men. It was not
uncommon for a theater boss to take a wife or a concubine from among
the actresses he employed. Given the extremely imbalanced power rela-
tions between the boss and his female employees, a boss’s control over a
famous actress’s sexuality often meant virtual ownership of her person and
the opportunity to exploit her talent and labor for economic gain. An actress
could be very popular among audience members, therefore, but still have
70 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 92 ===

no social status and little control over her economic and personal situa-
tions. Overwork and pressure often led to illness. The death of Ma Zhang -
hua is only one example among many.
Among the most important and worrisome matters for an actress was mar-
riage. For a woman in traditional society, marriage was the most important
event in her life, because the social system made her reliant on her husband
and sons for her support and comfort. While this situation had recently begun
to change during the Republican period, with the slow emergence of pro-
fessional and working women, marriage was still more important than a career
for most women, socially, psychologically, and practically. The Republican
actress, one of these new professional women, enjoyed economic indepen-
dence to varying degrees. This independence, however, was compromised
by the lingering public culture of erotica, in which the voyeuristic gaze
favored young female bodies, effectively making a performing career a young
woman’s privilege and a transitional stage that would invariably end with
marriage. Marriage was also important because it gave the actress standing
in social and familial institutions, redeeming her from her dubious status
as a female entertainer. For all these reasons, getting married and marry-
ing well when still young were priorities for most actresses. Ordinary
actresses often found spouses among the male staff members of their com-
pany or opera circle, while popular actresses often became concubines of
rich men, a traditional practice still common during the early Republican
period. Yet, as the Republican era gender ideology slowly changed the
social practice of marriage, many Yue opera actresses tried to maintain
their ﬁnancial vitality and shunned the status of the concubine. Popular
Yue opera actresses who married during the 1940s, including Yao Shui-
juan, Xiao-Bai Yumei, and Ma Zhang hua, made a point of not becoming
the secondary wives of rich men. Both Yao and Xiao-Bai, as well as many
other popular actresses, suffered varying degrees of abuse and exploitation
at the hands of their husbands. Ma died young, and Yao and Xiao-Bai had
unhappy married lives and raised their children without the presence of,
or help from, their husbands.
21 Despite their ﬁnancial comfort, these
actresses suffered in their personal lives, unable to fully overcome the stigma
attached to women entertainers that left them vulnerable to scorn and abuse
from their often unruly and unreformed husbands.
The public image of Yue opera actresses was also unﬂattering. Portray-
als of actresses as sexual beings subject to the whims of powerful men were
common in contemporary popular literature. One such example is the char-
acter Shen Fengxi in Zhang Hengshui’s novel Fate in Tears and Laughter, pub-
The Rise of Feminine Opera    71

=== PDF PAGE 93 ===

lished in 1929. In this novel, a dagu (a form of story-singing in the Beijing
area) singer, Shen Fengxi, is forced to become the concubine of a warlord,
who tortures her until she goes insane and then abandons her. In addition,
as the fates of Ruan Lingyu, Ma Zhanghua, and Xiao Dangui testify, real-
life actresses also faced personal tragedies, which became fodder for liter-
ary portrayal and public gossip that further debased the image of the actress
in the public eye.
The popularity of Yue opera and its actresses, therefore, appears in sharp
contrast to their marginal social status. Insightful contemporaries were aware
of this contradiction. In his comments on Ruan Lingyu’s death, Lu Xun
remarked that actresses were “very famous but had no power” in the face
of slander and the tabloids.
22 Ma Zhanghua’s death in 1942 only made her
colleagues more acutely aware of their situation. A talented Yue opera actress
who specialized in young male roles, Ma was on the fast track to fame after
coming to Shanghai in the mid-1930s. Her handsome appearance, beau-
tiful voice, and articulate performances quickly made her the leading actress
at the Dalai Theater. In 1941, defying the will of her boss Lu Gendi, Ma
married the son of one of her fans, a certain Mrs. Bao, and retired from the
Dalai Theater. Ma’s father-in-law, a businessman, soon organized a com-
pany for her, and she staged a few successful performances at the Tianxing
Theater. Angered by the loss of his main source of revenue and the object
of his sexual desire, Lu set out to destroy Ma’s good name. He sent hate-
ful letters to the Bao family and paid tabloids to slander Ma by fabricating
stories about her having sexual relations with men prior to her marriage.
Ma was deeply hurt but had no way of retaliating. Eleven months after her
marriage, Ma died of tuberculosis. She was twenty-one years old. Although
a causal connection between Ma’s illness and her maltreatment by Lu was
never clearly established, it was nevertheless popularly assumed.
23
Ma’s death, which caused a public scandal, saddened her colleagues and
triggered Yue opera reforms led by Yuan Xuefen, Ma’s stage partner at the
Dalai Theater and one of the more self-aware and autonomous personali-
ties among Yue opera actresses. Born in 1922, Yuan was the eldest child of
a rural family in Shengxian. The family lived off the father’s meager income
as a primary-school teacher for a few years, but the father lost his liveli-
hood when the Great Depression hit Shengxian’s sericulture economy. Since
the family did not have a surviving son, Yuan was expected to help the fam-
ily as a son would. Her father thus took her to the school where he taught
and made her study for a couple of years, preparing her for work in a silk
factory in Shanghai. The young Yuan Xuefen, however, loved to sing opera
72 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 94 ===

and joined a girls’ opera school at age eleven on her own initiative. Yuan’s
father objected, based on traditional views against female performers, but
her mother backed her, hoping Yuan would eventually bring some cash
income to the family. Yuan did better. After her success in Shanghai, she
provided for the whole family back in Shengxian and properly buried her
father when he died of lung disease in 1942. She then moved her mother
and sisters to Shanghai to live with her and provided for her sisters’ edu-
cation and marriage expenses. The school Yuan joined in 1933 was called
the Four Seasons Company (Sijichun Ban), and Yuan’s basic literacy dis-
tinguished her among her classmates. Then, in 1938, Yuan came to Shang-
hai, her school having become a company, and performed as the second
leading actress at the Dalai Theater. From 1938 to 1941, Yuan collaborated
with the leading actress Ma Zhanghua in many plays on the Dalai stage. 
Yuan practiced the axiom “Carry yourself pure and clean; perform hon-
estly and earnestly.” While Ma played amorous young male roles, Yuan
refused to play loose women and consistently portrayed morally restrained
maidens. In real life, Yuan joined a religious sect and was a declared vege-
tarian and celibate in order to avoid unwanted social and personal engage-
ment. Ma’s conﬂict with Lu and her subsequent death probably shocked
Yuan more than any other Yue opera actress, as she had witnessed Ma’s ill-
fated attempt to control her sexuality, private life, and ﬁnances.
24 Eventu-
ally, it became clear to Yuan that actresses’ ambiguous social status made
them vulnerable to economic and sexual exploitation, and that this ambi-
guity was closely related to the low status of their opera, something for
which they were partially responsible as purveyors of cheap eroticism. Yuan
recalled:
Everyone who is familiar with history knows that Yue opera at the time had
no status to speak o f...  and could not claim to be decent entertainment
let alone to have any positive social utility. Even in a well-developed tra-
ditional play such as The Butterﬂy Lovers, beautiful folklore was riddled with
all kinds of feudal superstitions and fatalist trash....  T h e r e  w a s  a l s o  a  l o t  o f
erotic material in the lyrics that I felt uncomfortable singing. In the widely
circulated version of the story, a preponderance of dross overshadowed the
essence. As early as the late 1930s, when Ma Zhanghua and I were stage
partners, we agreed not to sing these obscene lyrics and did a preliminary
cleanup of the play ....  A t  the time, I could claim no enlightenment but
simply felt deeply hurt having to put on a performance like this. It was humil-
iating to the actresses. If it was only for the sake of making a living, then
The Rise of Feminine Opera    73

=== PDF PAGE 95 ===

there were a lot of other jobs one could choose! This was one of the rea-
sons why I felt reform was absolutely necessary.25
This passage speaks of the beginning of a historical process in which a
generation of young Yue opera actresses took control of their lives and
careers. By the late 1930s, as they established their star status, Ma and Yuan
began to rebel against what they deemed to be humiliating performances,
and in 1942, Yuan turned this spontaneous resistance into self-conscious
theatrical reforms. 
Like many other minor operas of the period, Yue opera production was
rough around the edges, and its content was old-fashioned, replete with
lighthearted ﬂirtations and crude sexual jokes. The theater itself was a noisy
place, and while actresses performed onstage, chaos unfolded in front of
them. The audience chatted, laughed, and told jokes; waiters hurried about
serving tea; and hot wet towels were tossed through the air. These famil-
iar aspects of theater life now made Yuan uncomfortable, especially as she
became aware of ongoing trends in theatrical reform and the connection
between the low social status of actresses and the practices of their the-
ater. In her memoir, Yuan wrote about her experiences in these few years
leading to her decision on Yue opera reform in 1942. Of Shanghai in 1938,
she recalled:
The performances on the stage were nonsensical, badly organized, and with-
out ﬁxed scripts, while the atmosphere in the audience hall and backstage
was simply foul. Patrons ﬂattering their favorite actresses was a prevalent
practice, and [Yue opera] company bosses regularly proﬁted by making
actresses perform at banquets and private homes. I regretted that I had stum-
bled into the wrong profession when I was young and naive, but it was very
difﬁcult to go back to school and change my career. Father was dying of lung
disease, and the responsibility of my family’s livelihood was so heavy that I
had no choice but continued to perform while enduring great pain and self-
sacriﬁce. In order to maintain a quiet and peaceful life, I became a Buddhist
vegetarian and shunned social life. I thereafter changed from a merry and
lively girl to a quiet person who paid attention only to the safeguarding of
her own moral standard....  B u t  bad news kept coming. First, talented Ma
Zhanghua had to leave the Dalai Theater and stopped performing with me;
then her separate performances lacked [personnel] support; ﬁnally, suffer-
ing from poisonous slanders, she fell ill and died in melancholy and bitter-
ness. She was only twenty-one! When the bad news came, I was shocked,
74 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 96 ===

sad, and full of bitter hatred! I was so angry and upset about Ma Zhanghua
dying uncleared of a false charge that I suddenly began to vomit blood. At
the same time, I could no longer stand the theater and company bosses and
my uncle “protector”—all of them disregarded my illness and forced me to
continue performing. I then asked a fellow townsman Liu Baoxiang to accom-
pany me and traveled back home.
26
While the recollection may have been neatened by the passage of time,
and inﬂuenced by the socialist ideology that guided Yuan’s career after 1949,
it indicates many tensions she felt at the time. At home, Yuan rested for
about half a year and kept her father company in his last days. When she
returned to Shanghai, Yuan declared her intention to reform the Yue opera
theater:
The bosses who invited me [to perform] had ideas that were very different
from mine. They would consider nothing but their proﬁt. The most impor-
tant question for me was, however, what had I gained in the past eight years
of performing with the opera school/company? All these meaningless per-
formances of nonsensical stories had given me nothing but hatred and
loathing of the backward and dark institution. I therefore determined to leave
the opera school/company and to start on a new path that would change my
personal life and the destiny of the genre.
27
Love Drama and the Rise of Women’s Yue Opera
The reforms Yuan Xuefen inaugurated in 1942 should be viewed as a phase
in an ongoing urban transformation of Yue opera that centered on two major
tasks. The ﬁrst was to cleanse Yue opera of the lower-class crude eroticism
that had always been part of the minor-opera tradition and to replace it
with a mode of intensiﬁed love drama prevalent in Republican Shanghai’s
popular literature. The second task, discussed in the next section, was to
enhance the production values of Yue opera performances and remake a
shabby peasant form into a dazzling urban spectacle.
Ridding Yue opera of the peasant eroticism typical of minor operas was
a prerequisite to successful performing careers in urban centers. Perform-
ers not only were under pressure to capitulate to the elite demand for moral
sanitization but were also seeking measures by which to cater to the tastes
of an emerging urban middle-class audience, of which women composed
the fastest-growing sector.
The Rise of Feminine Opera    75

=== PDF PAGE 97 ===

Historically, crude sexual themes, performed using a combination of sex-
ually explicit lyrics and gestures, had been a standard feature of male-cen-
tered minor operas. In catering to a lower-class male audience in rural
gambling halls and teahouses, the female body was often described at length,
part by part, creating a visual image of a composite sexualized body. Exam-
ples of such eroticism are abundant in minor-opera repertoires. One piece
of “Ningbo story-singing” (Ningbo tanhuang), predecessor of Ningbo opera,
Floating Boat (Danghu chuan), describes a young man’s overnight boat ride
from Changshu to Suzhou, Jiangsu. Along the way, the young man and
the two sisters who operate the boat each sing a folk song. The young man’s
song, “Eighteen Caresses” (Shiba mo), sung in plain local colloquial,
describes a woman’s body from head to toe, following the movements of
a man’s hand and emphasizing sexual organs.
28 Other examples are found
in such works as Little Cowherd (Xiao fangniu), Selling Coal (Mai qingtan), and
Selling Straw Cradles (Mai caotun), titles from the repertoires of various local
minor operas and their story-singing predecessors. Crude eroticism fea-
tured not only in short pieces about peasant life but also in more devel-
oped narratives, such as He Wenxiu (He Wenxiu), A Pair of Phoenix Jade Clasps
(Shuang zhufeng), and early versions of The Butterﬂy Lovers.
29
Evidence shows that sexually explicit performances were regular features
of minor operas during the 1920s and 1930s, and both actors and actresses
in Shengxian opera performed sexual scenes in Shanghai as well as in towns
and villages in Zhejiang. One good example is a scene from Marriage as a
Result of Three Smiles (Sanxiao yinyuan), performed by women’s Shengxian
opera in Shanghai in the 1930s. Zhou, a young scholar disguised in women’s
dress, plays a trick on a young mistress and, successfully passing himself off
as a woman, is allowed to sleep with her for the night. Zhou then delivers
the following lines in speech and song:
[Speech] Well, well, well. The young mistress has fallen sound asleep.
Let me feel her body all over. 
[Song] One hand opens the blue cotton bed curtain, two eyes steal a look
at the girl’s pretty face; gently feeling her body inside three layers of quilts,
from four directions to touch her breasts, ﬁve ﬁngers reach her privates. Ya!
So frightened am I that I lose control over my six senses, trembling as if I
have gone mad. 
[Speech] Ah ya ya! Feeling my way around, I checked her privates for
urine. Ha, ha, ha! Let me compose a poem: This part is truly amazing. Two
76 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 98 ===

peaks on both sides of a little stream, spring water dripping from the inside
of the cavity, lush grass outside the door. There is water but no ﬁsh; there
is no wood, but the bird can rest. Even if you spend a thousand pounds of
gold, it is not easy to get; many people lose their minds for it.
30
Such passages were scattered throughout the pages of the cheap lyric books
and scripts that recorded established stage performances.31
Educated men’s bias against this kind of unreﬁned eroticism was com-
mon at the time. One contemporary commentator had this to say about
Yuyao opera, a notoriously erotic minor opera developed a little earlier than
Shengxian opera in the same region:
Yuyao opera is the most spineless of all Shaoxing operas,32 for its lyrics are
the most crude, vulgar, and disgusting of them all. It does not care about
costumes or makeup, let alone ideas, and it boasts no acting skills. Ofﬁcials
constantly ban it, but they cannot possibly eliminate it. The opera is greatly
popular among the lower orders of society. They sing in small teahouses in
poor parts of the countryside and remote areas and charge very little, almost
nothing. After a whole day of hard labor, country bumpkins take it as their
chosen form of entertainment and crowd teahouses to see it. The perform-
ers are mostly unemployed wanderers. The opera corrupts public morals
beyond our imagination.
33
Cleansing itself of crude eroticism was only the ﬁrst step taken by any
minor opera aspiring to raise its status in the urban market. The larger ques-
tion was one of stylistic redeﬁnition, or how to turn minor opera’s plain,
rough style into sophisticated expressions of love and desire that would
appeal to urban tastes. Faced with this challenge, the male and female troupes
of Shengxian opera departed, and their respective choices for achieving
artistic sophistication resulted in the decline of all-male and the rise of all-
female troupes.
34 Male Shengxian opera, upon entering Shanghai, followed
the model of major operas, emulating the highly stylized movements of
Beijing opera and Shaoxing major opera while copying their costumes and
stage designs (see ﬁg. 2.1). As one contemporary reviewer observed: “I have
also seen diduopera performed by male actors. It seems as if actors like Wei
Meiduo and Ma Chaoshui sing a little faster than is done in women’s didu
opera. The play they put onstage, the performance, and the stage effect
look very much like that of Shanghai-style [Haipai] Beijing opera. I am
The Rise of Feminine Opera    77

=== PDF PAGE 99 ===

2.1  Stage photo of the all-male Shengxian opera The King of Zhou and His Favorite 
Concubine, Daji (Zhou Wang yu Daji), with Ye Qinfang as Daji (left) and Tang Degui 
as the King of Zhou, Shanghai, 1920s. In style, the all-male Shengxian opera is similar
to Beijing opera but quite different from women’s Shengxian opera, which developed
in the ensuing decades. (Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997) 

=== PDF PAGE 100 ===

afraid that this will shake the very foundations of didu opera.”35 In hind-
sight, it is apparent that male Shengxian opera was going against the cur-
rent of change, but at the time, the actors had few choices available to them,
as major operas, especially Beijing opera, represented the most sophisti-
cated forms of opera at a time when new forms had not yet been estab-
lished. Moreover, male actors of minor operas looked to major operas for
inspiration, because major-opera troupes also consisted mainly of male
actors, having only recently admitted a few actresses. The problem was
that the artistic style of major opera did not ﬁt well with the content of
minor opera. The highly stylized movements of Beijing opera, which por-
trayed the ritualistic and reserved manner of generals and high ofﬁcials,
were not effective when used to express passionate love by the young lovers
featured in minor opera.
The all-female troupes, on the contrary, developed a new feminine
mode of expressing sexual themes. Two mutually reinforcing factors
affected the course of women’s Yue opera in the late 1930s: changes in
the composition of opera audiences and the maturation of all-female the-
ater. The audience for Yue opera changed from a lower-class, male major-
ity to one anchored in a growing core of upper- and middle-class women.
While men of letters despised lower-class eroticism, educated women
probably felt at least uncomfortable with the ways in which minor opera
objectiﬁed the female body. Two points need to be made in analyzing
the tastes of Shanghai’s middle-class women audiences. First, the explo-
ration of sexual and love relations in the framework of marriage and fam-
ily proved more attractive for women, especially middle- and upper-class
women, because women’s sexuality had historically been constructed
within the conﬁned domestic settings of traditional patriarchal society.
They could not, for example, take seriously a sexual encounter such as
the one described in Floating Boat because it is so far outside the family and
marriage context. In fact, the genre, Ningbo story-singing, which featured
such pieces, was notorious for its low taste and was never popular among
Shanghai’s middle-class women audiences. In contrast, the play Marriage
as a Result of Three Smiles was a popular women’s Yue opera play largely
because the sexual scenes are grounded in a complicated narrative of the
traditional scholar-beauty love story that ends with happy marriage. Sec-
ond, explicit sexual scenes, even those presented in the context of love
stories, had to be replaced with more reﬁned expressions of love and desire.
Modern, educated middle-class women, especially those in Shanghai, the
modern metropolis and center for cultural production and consumption,
The Rise of Feminine Opera    79

=== PDF PAGE 101 ===

were trained by popular literature and Hollywood movies to appreciate
romantic love and artful expressions of sexual desire. 36
The rapidly maturing all-female theater met the demands of this new
audience. Actresses, who had long suffered from traditional biases against
women entertainers and the objectiﬁcation of their bodies by the male
erotic gaze, came to identify the sexual obscenities they had been per-
forming as a major source of their own social degradation. As a single-
gender theater, it was easier for women’s Yue opera to replace crude, poorly
integrated sexual jokes and gestures with a more sentimental form of expres-
sion capable of conveying love and passion, as well as erotic desire, as
part of the narrative of marriage and family. The contemporary com-
mentator Xiao Wo compared the different acting styles of women’s Yue
opera and Beijing opera:
With regard to singing, didu opera differs from Beijing opera. In Beijing opera,
different voices are strictly deﬁned for use by different roles, and all the
actors who specialize in a particular role sing in the same voice. In didu opera,
actresses sing with their own natural voices and thereby avoid such com-
mon drawbacks as exaggeration, overacting, and fabrication. On the Yue
opera stage, there is nothing but self-expression of one’s true nature, and
the performers have freed themselves of the shackles of traditional artiﬁcial
movements and singing styles.
37
Zhang Linghui, a Zhejiang native who moved to Taiwan with the Nation-
alist government in 1949, recalled that, in the late 1930s and early 1940s,
major women’s Yue opera companies in Shanghai all trained in Zhejiang and
periodically returned there to perform after settling in Shanghai. In light of
the frequent interactions between Yue opera troupes in Zhejiang and Shang-
hai, Zhang’s observation of women’s Yue opera performances in the Zhe-
jiang countryside should also hold true for women’s Yue opera in Shanghai:
Because it did not represent real life, Chinese opera often did scant work in
portraying the details of human feelings. When a character was supposed
to cry, for example, the actor would simply raise his arm and put his sleeve
in front of his eyes a few times, indicating weeping. All local operas acted
in this manner. When I saw Yue opera in the countryside, however, I found
that the actresses were all able to put themselves into the shoes of the char-
acters they were playing and convey the characters’ inner feelings. In the
case of a tragedy, they often performed the ﬁctional plots with their own
80 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 102 ===

true feelings and cried with abundant tears ﬂowing down their cheeks, mak-
ing the scene virtually real. Their earnest performances often won the hearts
of rural women and made them cry along with the characters onstage.
38
Feature ﬁlms, especially Hollywood ﬁlms, had much impact on minor
operas in search of their own acting style, different from that of the major
operas. Scenes common in these ﬁlms—a handsome young man holding
hands with, hugging, or kissing a pretty young woman, lovers exchanging
affectionate looks—exempliﬁed natural expressions of passion and intimacy
to minor-opera performers as well as to Shanghai’s romance-loving audiences. 
The opera stage was, however, very different from the movie screen. It
is one thing to perform before the camera, and it is another to perform pas-
sionate love before a live audience. It would indeed have been too embar-
rassingly real for both performers and audience members in a society in
which free expression of passion and intimacy between lovers was more
an ideal than a reality for most people. This gap between what people liked
to see and what they could actually do in real life gave women’s Yue opera
a tremendous advantage over other operas with both male and female per-
formers, because expressions of intimacy between women were commonly
displayed in public. As an all-female theater, Yue opera could use a  natural -
istic acting mode and thereby be more expressive when performing inti-
macy and passion in love melodramas, because everyone in the theater knew
that the performers were women (see ﬁg. 2.2). The contemporary Yue opera
critic Cai Yuying explained:
Normally there is nothing surprising about men and women perform-
ing together onstage. But men and women still do not socialize openly in
the countryside. As young girls in Shaoxing are shy when encountering
[male] strangers, it is naturally impossible for them to perform with actors
onstage. Even when they do, they merely perform their duty in a perfunc-
tory manner.
The essence of drama lies in the convergence of the performers and the
roles they play. The story is ﬁctional, but the performance has to be lifelike—
that is what makes for an excellent show. The acting seems more earnest and
real in all-male or all-female theaters. The plot almost always falls apart when
men and women perform together. For the actress certainly wants to avoid
getting too close to the actor she is performing with, and the actor is also too
restrained by various considerations to guarantee a well-acted play. In the case
of romantic love stories, the passion felt by the lovers is reﬂected in the story
The Rise of Feminine Opera    81

=== PDF PAGE 103 ===

line through ﬂirtation, elopement, or sexual intercourse and has to be ade-
quately performed in order to bring the play to a climactic ending. Look at
the performance put on by gender-straight theaters: actors and actresses are
indifferent, listless, and merely muddle through the show. That is why I always
oppose gender-straight theaters. It is not that I am old-fashioned, but rather
that the ﬁnal product does not encourage gender-straight performances.
39
Veteran Yue opera actresses support Cai’s remarks. When asked why all-
female Yue opera became more popular than gender-straight theaters,
82 The Rise of Feminine Opera
2.2  Actresses Xu Yulan (left) and Fu Quanxiang in Gold and Beauty
(Huangjin yu meiren), 1944. The display of intimacy between
heterosexual lovers was tolerated in women’s Yue opera but would
have been scandalous in gender-straight theaters in Republican
Shanghai. (Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997)

=== PDF PAGE 104 ===

actresses who performed during that period, such as Xiao-Bai Yumei, Fu
Quanxiang, and Xu Yulan, all gave similar answers: In a women’s theater,
they could act more naturally and passionately without restraint, while it
was awkward to do so with male actors.
40
Thus, under the elite directive to cleanse traditional sexual “obscenity”
from minor operas, and in order to meet the demand of a changing urban
opera constituency that increasingly consisted of upper- and middle-class
female patrons, the all-female Yue opera developed a new mode of acting
that replaced old-fashioned, crude sexual scenes with reﬁned, sentimental
expressions of love and desire.
Modernity as Respectability: The Making of New Yue Opera
If being an all-female theater gave Yue opera a natural advantage in per-
forming the modern drama of love and desire, then it was the conscious
reform efforts of Yue opera actresses in the late 1930s and 1940s that fully
developed the potential of women’s Yue opera and transformed it into a
truly modern master theater of love drama. Before Yuan Xuefen initiated
her reforms, leading actresses Yao Shuijuan and Xiao Dangui had already
begun theirs. In 1938, Yao Shuijuan invited Fan Li, an unemployed for-
mer editor for Dagong Daily (Dagong bao), a mainstream newspaper, to
create new plays for her. Around the same time, Xiao Dangui invited Wen
Zhong, who had had a career in civil drama, to be her playwright.
41 Both
actresses also experimented with the modern stagecraft of ﬁlm and spo-
ken drama. Yuan’s reforms, however, consisted of a more conscious effort
to make Yue opera into a meaningful modern theater, like spoken drama,
and to modernize the Yue opera institution by establishing the opera’s artis-
tic staff.
More clearly than the reforms of Yao Shuijuan and Xiao Dangui, those
of Yuan Xuefen took spoken drama as its model, as Yuan considered it the
most respected theater in town.
I went to see spoken drama and felt totally refreshed. First, the new plays:
it was quite moving to see progressive spoken-drama workers put on edu-
cational, patriotic plays such as Wen Tianxiang[Wen Tianxiang], Ge Nenniang
[Ge Nenniang], and The Spirit of the Revolutionaries [Dangren hun]. Second,
the new forms: spoken drama used complete scripts, regulated rehearsals,
realistic and earnest acting, and modern stage sets. All these revealed a new
The Rise of Feminine Opera    83

=== PDF PAGE 105 ===

horizon to me, a person who lived in isolation, as if an oasis suddenly appeared
in the desert.42
Yuan had attended several spoken-drama shows, including Wen Tianxiang, a
patriotic play about the great general of the Southern Song dynasty who
fought heroically against invading barbarians. The play was staged a few
months before the Japanese entered “island” Shanghai at the end of 1941,
a heroic act given that the territory had been at the mercy of surrounding
Japanese troops long before the actual takeover. Spoken drama appeared to
Yuan to be a much more disciplined theater, as it produced progressive plays,
its stage sets were realistic, its directors exercised control over all details of
the production, its actors and actresses were serious performers, its audi-
ence was quiet and respectful, and it was devoid of obscenity and lighthearted
ﬂirtation. In short, the atmosphere in spoken-drama theater, in contrast to
the chaotic situation in traditional theaters, commanded respect. Spoken
drama had a small audience, but it had the social and cultural status Yuan
hoped to bring to Yue opera and its actresses.
43
Using her market power, Yuan cut a new contract with Lu Gendi, the
owner of the Dalai Theater, and began to implement her reforms in late
1942. Since Yuan was one of the most popular Yue opera actresses, theater
owners competed for her employment, and she agreed to return to the Dalai
Theater only when Lu consented to her reform plan. Lu and other old-
style theater owners had no interest in any substantial reforms, as they were
content with Yue opera’s current conﬁguration, which placed them at the
top of the system and made them the largest beneﬁciaries of the theater’s
popularity. As a local strongman, Lu also had little appreciation for the
reformist rhetoric that characterized people like himself as “feudal” elements
and saw reform as a threat to his power. But since he relied on Yuan Xue-
fen to bring in the proﬁts, he compromised.
44
Yuan’s aim was to reinvent Yue opera as a serious modern art form, along
the model of spoken drama. Her reforms were twofold—to create socially
redeeming content centering on, if not limited to, anti-feudal love stories
and to give the Yue opera stage a fresh appearance. 
She began with three main changes. The ﬁrst was to reorganize the struc-
ture of the theater and its backstage. During the nineteenth century, large
teahouses had been the traditional venues for opera; they served a rich and
powerful male audience who used the performances as occasions to social-
ize over food and drink. The traditional teahouse featured a three-dimen-
sional stage extending outward into the audience’s seats, which were set
84 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 106 ===

around tables, and interactions ﬂowed in all directions on and off the stage.
During the early Republican period, under the inﬂuence of various West-
ern-informed theatrical reforms, large teahouses either closed down or
restructured themselves in accord with Western-style theater forms; at the
same time, new theaters were built to screen ﬁlms and stage spoken dramas
as well as native operas from the 1920s onward.
45 Designed to focus atten-
tion on the performance, new theaters featured a framelike stage and audi-
ence seats facing the stage in rows that discouraged disruption of, and
distraction from viewing, the performance. These new structural features
of theater design met with popular resistance, however, as native-opera actors
continued to joke with the audience, while the audience chatted freely dur-
ing the performance, and actors and non-actors alike streamed freely in and
out of the backstage area during the performance. Theater owners set up
tables in front of the ﬁrst row of seats and attached wooden plates for teacups
and towels to the backs of the seats.
46 In such a traditional theater setting,
the performance was hardly the center of attention but only one of many
things going on in the theater. For Yuan Xuefen, there would be no dignity
for Yue opera and its actresses so long as they performed in such environ-
ments. She decided, therefore, that no one other than actresses and staff
were to be allowed backstage during the performance, and the theater was
to stop serving tea and distributing hot towels in the middle of a show. 
Yuan’s second change was to put the company in control of production
and programming; the theater owner was not to intervene so long as ticket
sales stayed high. The third was to hire literary men as directors and play-
wrights for the company. Lu agreed to the ﬁrst two changes but refused to
pay for directors, playwrights, or stage supervisors. From Lu’s viewpoint,
it was the stars that brought in the audience and there was no need for extra
personnel. Yuan was determined, however, and decided to donate a large
portion of her own monthly salary to pay for these men, whom Lu con-
sidered extra but Yuan considered essential.
47
The establishment of a “staff ” (juwu bu) composed of literary men was a
crucial step toward modernizing the institution of Yue opera—its internal
structure, production process, and productions. The staff served as an infor-
mal headquarters for Yue opera reform. Fan Ruijuan, a leading young male
impersonator and Yuan Xuefen’s stage partner, recalled the early reform period:
During the 1940s, Yuan Xuefen initiated Yue opera reform and recruited
many men of letters, the new-art workers [xinwenyi gongzuozhe]. These men
brought new ideas and new knowledge to local opera. Their involvement
The Rise of Feminine Opera    85

=== PDF PAGE 107 ===

greatly helped the reforms and pushed Yue opera into rapid develop-
ment. . . . At that time, we actresses were mostly young girls from poor peas-
ant families, and our literacy level was low. So we had great respect for the
cultured people in the staff. We addressed them as “teacher” [xiansheng] and
referred to the staff collectively as the “headquarters” of reform.
48
Most staff members were drawn from the ranks of the so-called new-art
youths ( xinwenyi qingnian)—young high-school and college graduates,
mostly from lower-middle-class families, who were deeply inﬂuenced by
the May Fourth New Culture and New Literature movements and who held
a left-leaning liberal outlook. They were fascinated with motion pictures
and actively participated in amateur spoken drama, but they were also
exposed to traditional Chinese forms, such as Beijing opera. When lead-
ing intellectuals and activists left the falling city before the outbreak of the
Paciﬁc War at the end of 1941, these talented petty intellectuals and vet-
erans of the amateur scene, lacking the ﬁnancial means and personal con-
nections to ﬂee, stayed behind and became invaluable resources for Yue
opera reform. During the heyday of the amateur spoken-drama movement,
from 1937 to 1941, patriotic young intellectuals and students took ama-
teur spoken drama to the streets in an effort to mobilize the general pop-
ulation for national resistance.
49 Their involvement, both as actors and as
audience members, in no small part created the spoken-drama boom. After
the fall of “island” Shanghai, however, the spoken-drama mass movement
in Shanghai came to a halt, and only a few professional spoken-drama com-
panies were able to survive on commercial performances.
50 This initial con-
traction of the reach of spoken drama left many spoken-drama veterans
unemployed and available to participate in Yue opera and other minor operas
as directors, scriptwriters, and stage designers. They thus became a vital
link between lowbrow operas and the New Culture theatrical reforms. 
Han Yi (b. 1922) was among the ﬁrst members of Yuan Xuefen’s new
staff.
51 His maternal grandfather, Ma Jianzhong, was the author of China’s
ﬁrst modern grammar book, Grammatical Dictionary by Mr. Ma (Ma shi wen-
tong), and a member of Prime Minister Li Hongzhang’s staff. By the 1930s,
however, the family had lost all its property, with the exception of some
small estates in nearby Kunshan County. When Han’s parents died in 1937,
his uncle absconded with what remained of the family property, and Han
took an apprenticeship with the British-American Tobacco Company, where
his father had worked. He joined a friendship association organized by
underground Communist Party members seeking to involve young employ-
86 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 108 ===

ees in the anti-Japan amateur spoken-drama movement. When the Japa-
nese took over the company after the outbreak of the Paciﬁc War, Han
refused to remain and found a job as a makeup technician for a spoken-
drama company, earning a small monthly salary of twenty to thirty yuan.
He soon moved to Yuan’s company when she offered him a monthly salary
of more than ﬁfty yuan. “To make a living was the ﬁrst concern, and per-
sonal interest was the second reason,” Han remarked, explaining why he
became interested in Yue opera, a lowbrow women’s theater that young lit-
erary men like himself generally looked down upon. 
As Yuan initiated her reforms, literary men such as Han Yi became her
indispensable lieutenants. “Yuan insisted on reform, and we pushed the trans-
formation,” Han stated. The main challenge of the reforms was, accord-
ing to Han, to “modernize” the art of Yue opera; cleansing Yue opera of its
feudal content had become such a natural task that it no longer required
special deliberation. His ﬁrst artistic reform was to replace the traditional
water-based makeup, which tends to be compromised by sweat and tears,
with Western-style waterproof oil-based makeup. Then, Han Yi and his
colleagues studied the history of clothing and designed different costumes
and hairstyles for characters of different dynasties. As both director and
stage designer, Han Yi was most noted for his inventive use of small devices
inﬂuenced by various Western aesthetic styles, which created a setting and
atmosphere that highlighted rather than overshadowed an actress’s per-
formance. In Sister Xianglin (Xianglin sao), of 1946, for example, Han cre-
ated a small half-bridge with an inclining streetlight standing next to it
against the backdrop of a blue sky—a typical Shaoxing street setting within
which the tragedy of Xianglin’s widow reaches its conclusion. Han’s
designs were described variously as “novel and pretty,” “fresh and imagi-
native,” and possessing “a special beauty.”
52
Remarkably, most of the actresses and staff members involved in the
reform process were young people around twenty years of age. “Big brother”
Lü Zhong was only about twenty-six. It was a youthful group, full of energy,
creativity, and a sense of mission. A cartoon appearing in a 1946 publica-
tion commemorating the founding of the Xuesheng Company, led by Yuan
Xuefen, depicted the relationship between the star actresses and the new
staff in terms familiar to urban youth: the cartoon, titled “Snow White and
the Seven Dwarfs,” shows Yuan Xuefen singing atop seven dwarfs—the
seven core staff members (see ﬁg. 2.3). Among the seven was Cheng Rong
(b. 1922), the only woman playwright in the company. A high-school grad-
uate, Cheng was the daughter of a lower-middle-class family from Ningbo.
The Rise of Feminine Opera    87

=== PDF PAGE 109 ===

Her father was a small merchant, and her mother, a housewife, loved Bei-
jing opera and Yue opera. When Cheng was young, her mother often took
her to Yue opera performances because the tickets were cheaper and admis-
sion was free for small children. In middle school and, later, in women’s nor-
mal school (the equivalent of high school), Cheng read Lu Xun, Guo Moruo,
Ba Jin, and other leading writers of the New Literature, but she also loved
classical poems and prose as well as works in translation by well-known Rus-
sian and Soviet writers. She became a fan of spoken drama, participated in
amateur performances, and stopped going to see Yue opera. For a New Lit-
erature student like Cheng, Yue opera appeared vulgar, old-fashioned, and
hopelessly meaningless in content; it was remote from the ideals of China’s
progressive New Culture. After graduating, she took a teaching position in
a primary school to support herself while attending Daxia University’s night
school, and eventually, her love of traditional opera and classical literature
drew her back to Yue opera. Cheng and her mother once attended a show
by Yuan Xuefen and were greatly impressed. Cheng became a great admirer
of Yuan and in 1944 joined Yuan’s company to become the ﬁrst woman
scriptwriter in Yue opera. In Cheng’s eyes, Yuan Xuefen was no ordinary
female entertainer. Unlike other Yue opera actresses, she asserted, Yuan was
more like a female student who loved to read and keep company with female
students, and her performance was earnest and socially meaningful.
53
The company’s only other female staff member, not pictured in the car-
toon, was the radio announcer Chen Shulian (1921–2000). Chen’s family
was originally from Shaoxing prefecture, but Chen was born in Huzhou,
which is also in Zhejiang. After high school, she became a primary-school
teacher and later a radio announcer at the Soviet Union Radio Station (Sulian
Diantai) in 1943.
54 In 1944, she met Yuan Xuefen when the actress came
to the station for a radio program and immediately befriended her. While
Chen still worked full-time at the radio station, Yuan enlisted her as a mem-
ber of the Xuesheng Company, the ﬁrst radio announcer in Yue opera. Each
day, Chen hosted Yuan and other actresses on her radio program, broad-
casting live from the theater or introducing new plays to the radio audi-
ence. Through her familiar voice and intimate approach, the audience was
introduced to the story lines, music, and songs of new plays while learn-
ing about the technical innovations used in the staging. Listeners could also
call in to comment, request a song, or reserve tickets. Chen’s radio pro-
gram became very popular among opera fans and provided an important
new channel of communication between the company and its audience.
55
Perhaps the most inﬂuential member of Yuan’s staff was Nan Wei (1921–
88 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 110 ===

1989), a talented playwright and director. Nan Wei was a native of Chang -
zhou, Jiangsu. His father, probably a small merchant sojourning in Shang-
hai, was fond of Suzhou story-singing. Nan Wei was familiar with the genre
as a child and became a Beijing opera fan in his teenage years, only to shift
his interest to motion pictures and spoken drama in the late 1930s. He
trained and worked as an accountant, but his love for the theater led him
out of business circles. Nan Wei ﬁrst took part in amateur spoken-drama
theater and later joined Yuan Xuefen’s company in 1943. Within three years
of joining the company, he had written and directed approximately thirty
new plays, including Sister Xianglin, and rearranged many traditional ones,
such as The Butterﬂy Lovers.
The reforms that began at the Dalai Theater in late 1942 led to a new
production process, according to which the newly established  staff—
The Rise of Feminine Opera    89
2.3  ”Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,” a cartoon depicting Yuan Xuefen and her
staff, celebrates the fruitful collaboration between Yuan and new-art youths in 
furthering Yue opera reform. Top: Yuan Xuefen. From left: Xiao Zhang, Lü Zhong,
Hong Jun (Han Yi), Zhong Mei, Zheng Chuanjian, Nan Wei, and Cheng Rong. 
(Xuesheng jinian kan 1946)

=== PDF PAGE 111 ===

consisting of playwrights, directors, and other technical support person-
nel for lighting, costume, and stage design—assumed responsibility for pro-
duction, altering the traditional actor-centered system prevalent in lowbrow
entertainments. In the traditional system, predicated upon the actors’ illit-
eracy and lack of access to scripts, a “master of plays” (shuoxi shifu), usually
an experienced actor or musician with basic literacy who was familiar with
the repertoire of traditional plays, taught the performers the acts and plots
of a play. He assigned roles among the actors, making sure they under-
stood their roles and the timing of their stage entrances and exits. During
the performance, the master posted an “outline of acts” (mubiao) backstage
to remind the performers of the order of the acts. Because only a few fre-
quently staged plays developed ﬁxed lyrics (these were known as the “meat”
[rouzi] and were taught to young actors), it was up to the actors to impro-
vise onstage everything from singing and dialogue to acting. Without ﬁxed
scripts, the show’s quality relied almost entirely on the performances of a
few main actors. Talented actors were given the whole stage on which to
show off their originality and creativity and might sing for what seemed
like forever to those backstage, leaving little time for the others to act. Infe-
rior actors often embarrassed themselves by running out of lyrics and devices
when the more powerful star actors failed to appear onstage as scheduled.
Stage productions were thus crude and unpredictable, and plays were rarely
reﬁned through the accumulated experience of several generations. In order
to cater to the tastes of an increasingly literary urban audience, Yue opera
reform in the 1940s sought to replace this actor-centered system with a
director- and script-centered system modeled on ﬁlm and spoken drama,
at the expense of the traditional improvisation.
At ﬁrst, the new scripts were little better than the outlines of acts. The
playwright arranged stories and plots and wrote some lyrics and verses but
left the rest for the actors to ﬁll out. In the famous 1938 play Tears Over the
Lovesick Land (Lei sa xiangsi di), Yao Shuijuan improvised eighteen lines in
song to express the protagonist’s extreme sadness, although the original
script provided only four lines. In the mid-1940s through the late 1940s,
and after staging many new plays, playwrights and directors slowly began
to establish their authority over the actresses’ habit of improvising onstage.
But the authority of the script and the director would be ﬁrmly established
only much later, as a cultural policy of the new PRC state.
56
The staff also reduced the theater owner’s power over stage productions.
Theater owners were mostly Shaoxing natives familiar with the traditional
Yue opera repertoire and were the ones to decide their theaters’ programs.
90 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 112 ===

With the establishment of the staff and the modernization of the produc-
tion process, Yue opera companies began to obtain artistic autonomy vis-
à-vis the owners.
The combined reform force of actresses and new-art youths resulted in
the creation of a self-proclaimed New Yue Opera (Xin Yueju), which sig-
naled a higher level of professionalism and literary sophistication. Actresses,
with the help of the director, became self-conscious practitioners of mod-
ern artistic methods such as character development. Fan Ruijuan recalled
how Nan Wei helped her in this regard:
Nan Wei opened up the actresses’ minds by telling us to learn about dra-
matic theories and cultivate our artistic elements. During the 1940s reforms,
I heard that Stanislavsky’s books specially dealt with theater direction. Hav-
ing no idea how hard his books could be, I asked Nan Wei to get me a copy
of On Actors’ Self-Cultivation [Lun yanyuan ziwo xiuyang (in Chinese transla-
tion)] and started reading it. My literacy level was low, and theoretical works
were difﬁcult for me. From time to time, I sought Nan Wei’s help. He was
always patient. He taught us how to study, understand, and perform a wide
range of characters, especially how to create various characters through our
careful observation of people in real life.
57
Under Nan Wei’s direction, Fan played roles ranging from romantic young
scholars to opium addicts, bandits, and simpletons and emerged as one of
the best Yue opera performers of her time. Zhang Guifeng, another lead-
ing actress who specialized in old men’s roles, at ﬁrst hated memorizing lines
and following a script but eventually came to terms with the new practice.
When Nan Wei assigned her the role of Wei the Bald in Sister Xianglin, con-
ventionally a clown’s role, Zhang made two trips to a teahouse on a dock
in Pudong to observe how hooligans acted and spoke and was able “to cap-
ture the essence” of her role.
58 With the director’s encouragement, second-
and even third-tier actresses also became concerned about better acting,
and their efforts raised the quality of each play and the professional level
of Yue opera overall.
59
Though heavily inﬂuenced by spoken drama, New Yue Opera  none -
theless also took inspiration from such traditional theatrical arts as Kun
opera, another native opera of the Jiangnan region popular during the Ming
and early Qing periods and known for its elaborate love stories. For the
actresses, popular rejection of spoken drama in favor of Chinese operas
made it clear that Yue opera should not become spoken drama plus singing.
The Rise of Feminine Opera    91

=== PDF PAGE 113 ===

While rejecting the highly formalized postures of the Qing major operas
represented by Beijing opera, they found inspiration in Kun opera’s ﬂuid
dance style. Yuan Xuefen invited the Kun opera master Zheng Chuanjian
to be the company’s director of choreography, and Zheng taught Yue opera
actresses to use Kun opera postures in their performances. Kun opera’s
unique body movements and postures greatly enriched Yue opera body lan-
guage and contributed to a ﬂuid acting style that integrated song and dance.
This particular mode of traditional stylistic acting ﬁt well with the modern
naturalistic expression of love and desire, as Yue opera actresses creatively
used traditional singing and dancing to enhance the aesthetic intensity of
the modern romance.
60 As a result, a native opera that combined a Chi-
nese-inﬂuenced acting style with Western-inﬂuenced stage design and the-
ater discipline appealed to metropolitan audiences by means of its refreshing
modernity and familiar native sensibility.
With Yuan Xuefen’s company leading the way, other major Yue opera com-
panies implemented similar reforms, and New Yue Opera ﬂourished.
61 Dur-
ing the 1940s, more than one hundred modern productions of  anti-feudal
love dramas enhanced by innovative stage sets and ﬂuid singing and dance
reshaped Yue opera into an exciting and respectable modern theater.
Patriotism, Eroticism, and Love Drama in Women’s Yue Opera
The Yue opera repertoire formed during the late 1930s and 1940s contained
four main thematic subgenres: patriotic and revolutionary plays, family
morality plays, erotic plays, and romantic love plays. The development of
this repertoire further illustrates a dynamic relationship among Yue opera
actresses’ struggle for survival, status, and respect; the elite rhetoric of the-
atrical reform; and the demands of a changing urban audience that trans-
formed Yue opera into a key sector in Shanghai’s popular-entertainment
industry. 
In order to enhance the status of Yue opera as a serious theater, actresses
eagerly staged patriotic plays, though they often embellished these plays
with love stories in recognition of audience tastes. The ﬁrst patriotic Yue
opera play was Hua Mulan (Hua Mulan), staged in 1938 in “island” Shang-
hai at the height of the resistance culture. Not incidentally, Hua Mulan was
also the ﬁrst women’s Yue opera play that made use of a playwright and a
director and thus marked the beginning of Yue opera reforms. Hua Mulan
was based on a folk song that originated in the late sixth or early seventh
century. In the folk song, Mulan, the daughter of an old village couple, dis-
92 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 114 ===

guises herself in men’s clothing and joins the army in place of her aging
father. When she returns triumphantly after twelve years on the battleﬁeld,
the emperor wants to make her a minister, but Mulan wishes only to return
home. She surprises her fellow soldiers when she emerges from her home
in women’s dress. While the original folk song conveys close feelings between
Mulan and her parents and praises her talents in a simple and joyful tone,
subsequent renditions elaborated on Mulan’s moral perfection, noting that
she was both loyal to the state and ﬁlial to her parents.
62 In modern times,
Mulan came to be portrayed as a heroic woman who defended her nation
by ﬁghting alongside men. In the wartime context of the late 1930s, such
updated versions of the story of Mulan became popular, because they res-
onated with several concerns prevalent in “island” Shanghai: nationalism,
patriotism, women’s liberation, and, indeed, romantic love. The legendary
female heroine, who dressed in men’s clothing and fought against barbar-
ian invaders, found her way into ﬁlm, spoken drama, Beijing opera, women’s
Yue opera, storytelling, and many other forms of entertainment.
In 1938, two Yue opera companies staged the story of Mulan in “island”
Shanghai. One version was adopted from Mei Lanfang’s Beijing opera piece,
while the other, more well-known version was staged by Yao Shuijuan,
scripted by Fan Li, and directed by Zhang Zifan (see ﬁg. 2.4). Fan Li was
a native of Hangzhou and had been a local newspaper correspondent for
the Dagong Daily. After Japanese troops occupied Hangzhou, Fan ﬂed to
Shanghai, where he was introduced to Yao Shuijuan, who was seeking a
playwright to help her develop new plays. Hua Mulan was Fan’s ﬁrst play.
Yao Shuijuan’s show, which combined patriotism with romance, was well
advertised by both tabloids and radio stations. Advertisements also ran in
the entertainment section of the American-operated local English-language
newspaper, The China Press, which published a brief introduction to the play
alongside a photograph of Yao Shuijuan dressed as Hua Mulan in military
uniform. The introduction reads: “Miss Yao Shui-chuan [Shuijuan], noted
Chinese actress, who is known as the Queen of Shaoshing drama [Yue
opera], will make her debut tomorrow in ‘Hwa Mo-lan’ [Hua Mulan], China’s
Jeanne d’Arc, at Tien Hsiang Theater, in the Coal Guild Building.”
63 The
Yue opera play opened on schedule and ran for about a month, with per-
formances twenty-seven nights in a row. Given that Yue opera companies
usually changed programs every two weeks—sometimes every week if ticket
sales were slow—Hua Mulan was indeed a success. The play brought new-
found status to Yao Shuijuan and to women’s opera in general. By produc-
ing a patriotic opera, Yao Shuijuan and her actress colleagues demonstrated
The Rise of Feminine Opera    93

=== PDF PAGE 115 ===

2.4  Yao Shuijuan as Hua Mulan in Hua Mulan (Hua Mulan), 1938. At the height
of resistance sentiment against the Japanese invasion in “island” Shanghai, Yue
opera actresses joined the national resistance culture with this patriotic play
about a legendary woman warrior. (Courtesy Mr. Wei Shaochang)

=== PDF PAGE 116 ===

their patriotism and progressive ideas and hence distinguished themselves
from old-fashioned popular entertainers (see ﬁg. 2.5).
The Japanese occupation made it impossible to stage patriotic plays, but
after the war, women’s Yue opera troupes continued to produce plays that
combined grand political narratives with love stories. For example, in Sad
Moon over the Liao Royal Palace(Qiliang Liao gong yue), of 1946, Yuan Xue-
fen depicted a patriotic court maid who fought off evil ofﬁcials for the good
of the state. In 1947, Prince Liu Chen(Guopo shanhe zai), with Xu Yulan cast
as Prince Liu Chen, criticized the corruption and decadence of the head
of an ancient state. Yin Guifang, a leading actress specializing in young
male roles who joined in the New Yue Opera reforms in the mid-1940s,
created a series of images of revolutionaries, including Shi Dakai, the
The Rise of Feminine Opera    95
2.5  Yuan Xuefen as Hua Mulan in Mulan Joins the Army
(Mulan congjun), 1944. The staging of this patriotic
play in occupied Shanghai hints at resistance on the
part of Yuan and her staff but also suggests Japanese
tolerance of popular culture. (Yuan 2002)

=== PDF PAGE 117 ===

great general of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, in Shi Dakai(Shi Dakai),
in 1946; the Guangxu emperor, the tragic reformist emperor of the late
Qing, whose efforts were quashed by Empress Dowager Cixi, in Emperor
Guang xu and His Favorite Concubine Zhenfei(Guangxu Di yu Zhenfei), in 1946;
and Sun Kexian, the great Ming loyalist who fought the invading Qing
army to his death, in Ge Nenniang (Ge Nenniang), of 1946. These plays,
though usually not big hits, were noticed and warmly received by inﬂuen-
tial intellectuals.
64
Family morality plays had been the mainstay of the Yue opera reper-
toire, and these included traditional plays such as Pearl Pagoda and Emerald
Hairpin as well as such modern plays as The Dark Family (Hei’an jiating), of
1944,65 and The Prodigal Son (Langdang zi), of 1947 . These plays were
intended to criticize social ills, such as drug abuse and gambling.66 As most
traditional family morality plays had a love story at their core and were
organized within the structure of love drama, they may be considered a
variation in the growing subgenre of the love drama. 
The mainstay plays of the Yue opera repertoire developed around per-
sonal and private narratives centered on love and desire. The process went
in two directions: one continued the traditional public culture of erotica
by turning the “vulgar” (su) into the “reﬁned” (ya), while the other displaced
the earlier crude eroticism with a new mode of intensiﬁed love drama. While
the reﬁned eroticism maintained the prior emphasis on “sex” (xing), love
melodrama made qing, or feelings of love, its focus and sex a subtext. The
development of these two subgenres were, however, inﬂuenced by the May
Fourth ideology of social and cultural reform that sought to eliminate the
public culture of erotica but was friendlier toward love drama. 
The subgenre of erotic plays in Yue opera, performed most notably by
the famous actress Xiao Dangui, explored women’s sexual desires. Xiao, an
excellent singer, actor, and acrobatic dancer, became a Yue opera super-
star around the same time as did Yao Shuijuan. Between the late 1930s and
her tragic death in 1947, Xiao successfully played roles ranging from the
female warrior in White-Water Shore (Baishui tan), to a medusa in The City of
Sizhou (Sizhou cheng), to the cross-dressing ﬁgures Cai Lanying in The Eagle-
wood Fan (Chenxiang shan) and the title character in Meng Lijun. Her most
acclaimed roles, however, were amorous women, such as the lonely and
desirous Yang Yuzhen in The Imperial Concubine(Guifei zuijiu), the seductive
Widow Ma in Widow Ma’s Inn(Ma Guafu kai dian), and the oversexed Pan
Jinlian in plays adapted from the Ming dynasty novels The Water Margin
(Shuihu zhuan) and Plum in a Golden Vase (Jinpingmei).
96 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 118 ===

In the early 1940s, Xiao was among the ﬁrst women’s Yue opera actresses
to use playwrights and directors. She was slow, however, to incorporate
such intellectual themes as nationalism into her plays. While Yuan Xuefen
and Yin Guifang explored the path of Yue opera reform and cultivated a
new constituency in female students and professionals with new-style love
dramas, Xiao Dangui’s repertoire, composed largely of sexually provoca-
tive plays, was popular among middle-class men and housewives. The female
images she created onstage were of lustful, daring women seeking sexual
satisfaction, and her performances explored a type of female eroticism
focused on sexual desire as the basis for, not the result of, the sentiment of
love. Her approach was thus distinguishable from both traditional crude
eroticism focused on sex only and trendier sentimental love dramas. This
kind of eroticism was common in women’s Yue opera at the time. The fol-
lowing contemporaneous tabloid description of an erotic scene from a pop-
ular play put on by Xiao Dangui and her stage partner Zhang Xiangqing
provides some idea of Yue opera eroticism of the 1940s:
The famous Yue opera actresses Xiao Dangui and Zhang Xiangqing came
to perform at the Zhedong Theater, and the audience in this middle district
loved their shows, especially the two plays at which they especially excel,
Widow Ma’s Innand Stir Up the Sanya Garden[Da’nao Sanya Yuan]. Tickets for
these shows were always sold out. They are currently staging Stir Up the Sanya
Garden again. Xiao Dangui is exceptionally beautiful and sexy in her bright
red cheongsam and high-heeled leather shoes; Zhang Xiangqing, in her long
white silken gown and Panama-style hat, deserves to be called a handsome
young man. Their performance of the ﬂirtation scene in the bedroom is really
impressive; especially original is the way they take off each other’s clothes.
Xiao initiates it by taking off Zhang’s coat, and Zhang then proceeds to take
Xiao’s clothing off, until they both are wearing only their underclothes. Even
the queen of ping opera, Bai Yushuang,
67 would have to admit her inferior-
ity before such a “bold” performance.68
The Yue opera fan Wu Ping saw similar performances of the famously,
or notoriously, erotic Widow Ma’s Innin the 1940s, and she loved it.69 In the
story, Widow Ma desires a guest at her inn, Di Renjie, a young scholar on
his way to the capital to take the civil-service examination.70 At midnight,
the widow, driven by uncontrollable desire, goes into Di’s room and tries
to seduce him—hence, the famous seduction scene.
71 Xiao Dangui was not
the only actress to play Widow Ma, as the play was widely popular and was
The Rise of Feminine Opera    97

=== PDF PAGE 119 ===

staged by almost every Yue opera company, but she was considered the best
of them all—passionate and sexual, yet sensitive and digniﬁed.
Explicit sexual expression was garbed in enhanced stage sets and cos-
tumes, exquisite performances, reﬁned lyrics, and romantic settings, as seen,
for example, in Record of Retributions (Guobao lu), with Mrs. Diao’s desire
for Wang Wen, a young scholar next door and a friend of her husband’s.
In the garden scene, Mrs. Diao, played by Xiao Dangui, sings reﬁned lyrics
expressing sexual desire and lovesickness while playing her lute, and Wang
Wen, played by Jia Lingfeng, accompanies her on a xiao, a vertical bam-
boo ﬂute, from the little hill in his own garden. Both sing of their desire in
romantic but sexually explicit lyrics.
72
Such explorations of female sexuality were very popular but ill fated in
Shanghai in the 1940s. It was said that Xiao always had a full house when-
ever she performed Widow Ma’s Innand that she always performed it when-
ever box ofﬁce sales were slow. Widow Ma’s Inn and other similar plays
prospered throughout the 1940s, with the support of Shanghai audiences
and the absence of governmental attention: While the Japanese occupation
authority simply did not seem to care, the Nationalist government of the
postwar period was too busy cracking down on the Communists to clean
up eroticism in popular entertainment.
73 The ofﬁcial ideology of the
Nationalist government and the elite nation-building rhetoric of theatri-
cal reform, however, deemed eroticism harmful to public morality. As the
Republican discourse of women’s liberation generally neglected the ques-
tion of women’s sexuality, paradoxically, the traditional virtue of qingbai
continued to set the moral standard for good women.
74 Thus, in the late
1940s, both Republican government and elite leftist intellectual ideologies
increasingly pressured Yue opera, and for that matter any lowbrow enter-
tainment, to refrain from sexually explicit acting, be it crude or reﬁned.
This trend ﬁnally culminated in the banning of erotic plays after 1949 by
the newly established PRC state.
Because patriotic plays relied on love stories to sell tickets and popular
erotic plays gave Yue opera a bad name, love drama became the dominant
subgenre during the process of Yue opera reform. In an article published in
Yue Opera World (Yueju shijie), Xu Jin, a young Yue opera playwright, dis-
cussed three kinds of Yue opera plays. One was the conservative kind, which
preserved the essence of traditional Yue opera but was behind the times.
Another was the radical kind, which went too far toward making Yue opera
into an art, neglecting the fact that Yue opera as a popular form was never
just a showcase for “pure art.” The third type of Yue opera play, Xu Jin wrote,
98 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 120 ===

catered to both audience tastes and the needs of the age. He asserted that
it was wrong to say that catering to the audience meant that reform was not
taking place: “Yue opera is gradually progressing, and its audience is
 growing—this is reform. It would be a failure if we raised artistic style to a
level that the audience could not understand.”
75 By “conservative” plays, Xu
meant the reﬁned erotic play represented by the famous Xiao Dangui as well
as traditional lower-class eroticism; by “radical,” he meant new plays loaded
with too much political message. It is not surprising that, with such an under-
standing, Xu Jin became a master of the Yue opera love melodrama, con-
tributing to the creation of several masterpieces, including The Butterﬂy Lovers
and Dream of the Red Chamber. The lyrics he wrote and edited for these plays
were among the best in Yue opera history—they were of high literary qual-
ity and were neither so reﬁned that they intimidated ordinary audience mem-
bers nor so vulgar that they repelled those who were better educated.
The leading actress Yin Guifang also spoke about the ways in which the
relationship between ideological pressure and audience demands inﬂuenced
Yue opera reform. To answer the call that Yue opera incorporate the nation-
state narrative into its story lines, Yin placed patriotic generals, warriors,
and scholars on Yue opera stages. In response to audience demands, Yin
made her characters sentimental, caring, and loyal lovers. Yin Guifang’s
reforms stressed the importance of retaining the “essence” of Yue opera, as
suggested in an interview with the mainstream newspaper The New Citizen
Evening News(Xinmin wanbao) on August 22, 1947: “I am not only for reform
but moreover hope to eliminate and not just amend the obscenities com-
mon in Yue opera. I uphold a principle, however, that the Yue-ness of Yue
opera must be retained.”
76 What was the “Yue-ness” Yin wanted to uphold?
From her other writings, it is quite clear that she considered love stories to
be the essence of Yue opera. Earlier that year, she had written: “Looking
back, [I see that] the larger part of every play has always consisted of pas-
sionate love between young men and women. This is how Yue opera won
a mass audience.”
77
Love stories were not necessarily conventional and were hardly mean-
ingless, despite the opinion of the cultural elite. In fact, the ﬁxation on love
in modern popular culture reﬂected the psychological needs of an urban pop-
ulation witnessing drastic changes in gender and sexual relations. Contrary
to the impression that love stories in women’s Yue opera, or in all popular
genres, were monothematic pabulum, the subgenre of love drama included
varieties such as exotic plays, cross-dressing plays, and love tragedies. 
The exotic play was often a mix of love story, patriotic theme, and adven-
The Rise of Feminine Opera    99

=== PDF PAGE 121 ===

ture set in an exotic time and place. One of the most popular plays of this
sort, Desert Prince (Shamo wangzi), of 1946, had a script by Xu Jin and was
directed by Zhong Min. Adapted from a story in the Arabic classic The
Thousand and One Nights, it tells the adventures of a young Mongol prince
forced to ﬂee into the desert after a rebellious tribal chief murders the king
and usurps the kingdom. On his wanderings, the prince meets and falls in
love with a young princess. But the tribal chief captures the princess and
renders the prince blind by means of black magic. The prince then allies
with the princess’s father, another tribal leader, and eventually overcomes
the rebels. As soon as he restores the kingdom, the prince gives up his crown
to search for his lover. At the end, he ﬁnds her in the desert, and her pas-
sionate embrace restores his eyesight. The two live happily together there-
after, and there is great peace and prosperity under their rule. This play
took Shanghai audiences to the Mongolian desert, displaying an exoticized
Mongol people in colorful native costumes, all the while employing a fairy-
tale love-adventure story line that was not so different from that of more
conventional love stories. The images of the beautiful, passionate, and heroic
Mongolian prince and princess that Yin Guifang and her partner Zhu
Shuizhao created on the Yue opera stage were at once exotic and familiar,
adventurous and conventional, and catered to the urban audience’s passion
for a combination of fantasy and comfort. By creating patriotic Mongol
heroes, the play was also politically correct in terms of government pol-
icy regarding Mongolia and the multiethnic character of the Republican
Chinese state. This was a love story that also spoke directly to the recent
history of Japan’s failed attempt to make inner Mongolia an “independent”
state during the Second World War.
The Yue opera cross-dressing performance illustrates how love rela-
tionships are explored in the seemingly meaningless cross-dressing play.
Cross-dressing, mistaken identity, and cross-gender acting are common to
both Chinese and English theatrical traditions, the most notable English
example being the plays by William Shakespeare that employed all three
techniques. Women’s Yue opera also used all three techniques, albeit with
an all-female cast instead of the Shakespearean theater’s all-male cast. Bei-
jing opera, in contrast, featured female impersonators, but transvestite plays
were few and represented a relatively insigniﬁcant part of its repertoire, as
love drama was never a strength of Beijing opera. Transvestitism was not
only a common device in Yue opera but also an essential part of the plot
in several of its most popular plays, including two masterpieces, The Butter -
ﬂy Lovers and Meng Lijun. 
100 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 122 ===

Although set in the Yuan dynasty, Meng Lijun was a modern play put
together and produced by Shengxian opera in Shanghai for a modern urban
audience. Shengxian opera ﬁrst staged this play in 1921, at the height of
the May Fourth New Culture Movement, when the discourse of women’s
liberation was still relatively new. Along with The Butterﬂy Lovers and Emer-
ald Hairpin, Meng Lijun was instrumental in making Shengxian opera a pres-
ence in Shanghai’s cultural market, and it became one of the most popular
plays of women’s Yue opera in the ensuing decades.
78
Meng Lijun tells the story of a talented girl, Meng Lijun, who ventures
into the world of men seeking justice and revenge for her father and her
ﬁancé, both high ofﬁcials persecuted by bad elements in the court of the
Cheng emperor. Lijun disguises herself as a man, passes the civil-service
examination, in which she takes ﬁrst place, and becomes the emperor’s
trusted prime minister. During her tenure, she manages to rehabilitate her
father and ﬁancé and punishes the wrongdoers. The emperor, however,
comes to realize that Lijun is a beautiful woman and desires to make her
his imperial concubine. Lijun remains loyal to her ﬁancé, however, and at
the end, she resumes her life as a woman and marries her ﬁancé with the
emperor’s blessing. 
In 1999, the Shanghai Yue Opera House staged a production faithful to
a late-1930s audio recording of the play, employing an all-female cast. The
double-layered sex play is intriguing: three actresses play out a heterosexual
romance involving two men and a woman pretending to be a man. The pro-
duction culminated in the act “Touring the Imperial Garden” (You Shanglin
Yuan),
79 by which point the emperor, who has become suspicious of his min-
ister’s true gender, orders Lijun to accompany him on a tour of the imperial
garden, where he tries to seduce her. As played by the actresses Zheng Guo -
feng (as the emperor) and Shan Yangping (as the transvestite minister), the
emperor has the upper hand, and the minister must rely on her wit and moral
courage to protect her chastity—the foundation of her dignity as a person.
The young emperor is affectionate and lustful, and he genteelly seeks his
objective by means of teasing, tricks, and a little coercion at times. Since
the emperor is played by a woman, the character’s desire for Lijun may be
seen as same-sex as well as opposite-sex staging. The minister is shy and
reserved, as is her nature as a woman, but at the same time brilliant and obe-
dient, as beﬁts her adopted nature as a male subordinate. Signiﬁcantly, while
her obedience also strongly suggests her femininity, when in masculine guise,
her display of wit only highlights her desperate situation—she has no way
out but to become the emperor’s sexual captive. Lijun is rescued at the last
The Rise of Feminine Opera    101

=== PDF PAGE 123 ===

moment when the emperor’s mother puts a stop to her son’s mischievous
behavior and returns everything to order. The performance not only com-
forts audience members by driving home the traditional virtues of loyalty
and chastity but also takes them into a fantasy world of dangerous pleasures,
namely, seduction involving ambiguously gendered characters carried out
according to the rules of intricate and ﬂuid sex games (see ﬁg. 2.6). 
Love tragedies, represented by the three classic masterpieces The Butter -
ﬂy Lovers, Tale of the Western Chamber (Xixiang ji), andDream of the Red Chamber,
were perhaps the most inﬂuential of Yue opera’s love dramas. The remak-
ing of The Butterﬂy Lovers illustrates the transformation of Yue opera into a
modern master theater of love drama, which took place during the Yue opera
reforms. In 1945, the Xuesheng Company restaged the story of the but-
terﬂy lovers as The T ragic Story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai (Liang Zhu
aishi), scripted and directed by Yuan Xuefen. The main modiﬁcation was
the use of modern stage design to enhance production values. The play
was staged again in 1946 with further changes in content and lyrics.
80 As
Yuan Xuefen explained:
The T ragic Story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai had been staged at the Nine-
Star Theater [Jiuxing] last year. This new version of the play is again dif-
ferent. Last time, as we were in such a hurry, we only reformed the stage
designs but left the lyrics and structure unchanged. I felt that further reform
of many old elements was needed to make the play more ideal, and that is
why I rearranged it again.
It is hard to say if the new T ragic Story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtaiis sat-
isfactory, and I myself am not sure. But we tried hard to make the story more
real and exciting, by eliminating many superﬂuous and obscene elements
and by integrating new ideas into the play as much as possible. 
. . . If the story of Liang and Zhu were real, I believe people would most
likely be sympathetic to their tragic story and lament the perils of arranged
marriage.
81
Emphasizing the theme of free love and marriage, the play eliminated such
“feudal” elements as bawdy eroticism and plots related to reincarnation and
other ideas from popular religions. It ended with an emotional climax, with
Yingtai crying and pouring her heart out before Shanbo’s bier.
82
The play created an image not only of an independent-minded woman
in Zhu Yingtai, played by Yuan Xuefen, but also of a woman’s man in Liang
Shanbo, played by Fan Ruijuan (see ﬁg. 2.7). Fan came into her own as an
102 The Rise of Feminine Opera

=== PDF PAGE 124 ===

2.6  A scene in “Touring the Imperial Garden,” from Meng Lijun (Meng Lijun), with
Shan Yangping as Meng Lijun disguised as a man and serving as the minister (left)
and Qian Huili as the emperor, Shanghai Yue Opera House, 1999. Multilayered
cross-gender performances are a common technique in women’s opera. 
(Courtesy Shanghai Yue Opera House)

=== PDF PAGE 125 ===

artist when she reinterpreted the role of Liang Shanbo and subsequently
became known for portraying sincere and kind young scholars. In folk ver-
sions of the story told during the Qing and early Republican periods, Liang
Shanbo is comically cunning, salacious, and dull at the same time because
his soul has been stolen from him by order of the Jade Emperor so that he
will be unable to ﬁgure out Zhu Yingtai’s true gender during the three years
they study together and live in the same room. While the Xuesheng Com-
pany’s 1946 version eliminated this premise, on the grounds that it was
based on superstition, Fan Ruijuan transformed Liang Shanbo into a book-
ish young man, a little naive regarding women, but sincere, tender, and
affectionate upon realizing his love for Yingtai. Fan’s portrayal earned Liang
Shanbo a nickname from the audience, “the adorable fool” (keai de shagua).
83
104 The Rise of Feminine Opera
2.7  Yuan Xuefen as Zhu Yingtai (left) and Fan Ruijuan as Liang Shanbo in The T ragic
Story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai (Liang-Zhu aishi), 1946. In the 1940s, Yuan Xuefen
and her stage partners transformed this centuries-old folk story into a celebration of
love and loyalty. (Yuan 2002)

=== PDF PAGE 126 ===

In the 1949 version of The Butterﬂy Lovers, staged by the Dongshan Com-
pany, Fan Ruijuan, as Liang Shanbo, and Fu Quanxiang, as Zhu Yingtai,
added a ﬁnal act to their performance. On her way to Ma’s household as
the new bride, Zhu Yingtai stops at Liang Shanbo’s tomb to mourn him
one last time. As Yingtai weeps, heaven responds with a thunderstorm, and
a bolt of lightning strikes the tomb and splits it open. As Yingtai jumps
into the grave, Ma Wencai and others try to hold her back by grasping her
skirt. After Yingtai disappears into the tomb, pieces of fabric torn from her
skirt become a pair of beautiful butterﬂies (played by the two stars garbed
in colorful butterﬂy dresses), happily courting each other under a rainbow
in a graveyard of ﬂowers in full bloom.
84
The artistic achievement of New Yue Opera in the 1940s also laid the
foundation for Yue opera’s continuous development in the 1950s when, with
the support of the PRC state, the genre gained national and international
inﬂuence. At a 1952 opera conference held in Beijing, The Butterﬂy Lovers
thrilled a national audience and brought home multiple awards for script,
music, stage design, and best actress. In 1953, the play was made into China’s
ﬁrst 35 mm color ﬁlm, and its 1954 premiere in Shanghai attracted a record
1.55 million viewers. It won the award for musical ﬁlm at the Eighth Inter-
national Film Festival in Czechoslovakia in July 1954 and an award at the
Ninth Edinburgh International Film Festival in Scotland in August 1955.
85
The ﬁlm was distributed internationally and caused a sensation in Hong Kong,
while the play toured nationwide and traveled to North Korea, the Soviet
Union, and Eastern Europe as part of a mission representing theatrical arts
from China. One performance in Berlin evoked such enthusiasm from the
audience that the actresses had to answer twenty-eight curtain calls.
86
The Rise of Feminine Opera    105

=== PDF PAGE 127 ===

Chapter 3
Patrons and Patronage
The rise of Yue opera in Shanghai in the mid-twentieth century was not
just a cultural phenomenon but also a social phenomenon that entailed
the emergence of new social groups in the hierarchy of the city’s public
space. The opera’s upward mobility was closely tied to its ability to build a
core of upper- and middle-class patrons, and Yue opera grew by enlarging
its audience base, keeping its lower-class audience while capturing rising
numbers of urban middle-class men and, especially, women. These upper-
and middle-class patrons of Yue opera were mostly from the rich Ningbo-
Shaoxing area of eastern Zhejiang, the native home of Yue opera, in which
Shengxian was a poor sibling. 
Yue opera’s ascent was thus closely related to the rise of three some-
times overlapping social groups in Republican Shanghai: an urban middle
class that could include a wide spectrum of urbanites, from white-collar
professionals, skilled industrial workers, and employees in service sectors
to the self-employed and freelancers; Ningbo-Shaoxing natives; and female
operagoers.
1 An investigation of the Yue opera constituency thus tells much
about the social and economic formations of the city’s population that fueled
the rise of Yue opera as a women’s culture as well as the stratiﬁcation of
the city’s popular culture in general.
Venues, Patrons, and the Opera
In Republican Shanghai, a hierarchy of venues for commercial performance
reﬂected the complex social stratiﬁcation of the audience, opera genres,
troupes, and performers. The various performance sites—teahouses, enter-
106


=== PDF PAGE 128 ===

tainment halls, and theaters—served people from various backgrounds and
embraced different cultural atmospheres. 
Westernization was part of modern theatrical reform in China. The ﬁrst
Western-style theater was perhaps the New Theater in Shanghai, built by
reformist Beijing opera actors Pan Yueqiao, Xia Yueshan, and Xia Yuerun
in 1908.
2 After the 1911 Republican Revolution, new-style theaters grad-
ually spread across the country and became the mainstream venue in Shang-
hai. In the 1930s and 1940s, in the colonial downtown area, a handful of
ﬁrst-rate modern theaters hosted spoken drama, drawing a core audience
of male intellectuals, while a score of large modern theaters featured major
Beijing opera and Yue opera troupes, with audiences centered on rich, pow-
erful male patrons for Beijing opera and upper- and middle-class female
patrons for Yue opera respectively.
Less equipped medium-size and shabby small theaters in and on the
peripheries of the city center, in Nanshi, Hongkou, and Zhabei, served as
venues for all kinds of local operas, geared toward lower- and middle-class
local audiences. Less prestigious Yue opera and Beijing opera troupes as
well as other local operas regularly staged productions in these theaters,
while itinerant troupes from nearby provinces and the countryside often
took over during the regular troupes’ summer and winter breaks. Teahouses
in these areas remained popular for itinerant troupes, storytellers, and story-
singers who entertained a mostly lower-class crowd.
3
Entertainment halls represented another new development in Republi-
can Shanghai’s public space. During the early Republican period, entertain -
ment halls provided a fashionable place for upper-class gentlemen to sample
modernity, drinking tea while looking out on the city’s skyline. Among
the most famous of these were the Great World (Da Shijie) and the New
World (Xin Shijie); both occupied multistory buildings in the downtown
shopping area and were miniatures of Shanghai’s entertainment world.
 Blinking neon lights illuminated the buildings’ exteriors, while inside, many
forms of popular entertainment could be found, from puppet and comic
shows, to storytelling, to various native operas. But during the 1930s, as
entertainment halls became increasingly popular among the urban masses,
upper-class patrons escaped to modern theaters, cafés, and hotel lounges,
leaving the entertainment halls to ordinary folks. A Shanghai municipal
government survey in the early 1930s shows that, on average, one per-
son from every working-class family in Shanghai visited the Great World
once per month.
4 A 1939 Japanese travelogue describes the Great World’s
popularity: “The Great World in the French concession is a dream world
Patrons and Patronage  107

=== PDF PAGE 129 ===

serving as an entertainment institution for the commoners, mainly lower-
class shop hands, laborers, and tourists. The entrance fee is twenty-two
cents.”
5 During the postwar period, entertainment halls declined sharply
in number. The Great World was the only independent entertainment hall
left, while a few others became attached to department stores and made
hardly any proﬁt.
6
For opera troupes, decisions on where to perform and whom to enter-
tain determined their social as well as economic status. While venues marked
the status of the performing troupe and the genre it represented, opera
troupes could advance along the hierarchy by performing at better places.
The constant movement of opera troupes and audiences among various loca-
tions points to a dynamic structure of entertainment that was at once hier-
archical and ﬂuid. Beijing opera, for example, regularly occupied the most
modern and grandest theaters in downtown but was also regularly featured
at the open fairground and entertainment halls attended by lower-class urban
crowds. While troupes performing in grand theaters for elite audiences cer-
tainly raised Beijing opera’s cultural status, performances at fairgrounds and
in entertainment halls inevitably imparted a lower-class character to the
genre. Beijing opera was, therefore, both upper and lower class, depend-
ing on how and where one viewed it. 
The rise of women’s Yue opera exempliﬁes the correlation among an
opera’s venue, audience, and status in that it shows how Yue opera’s entrance
into better theaters helped expand its middle-class constituency and hence
raised the genre’s status from lower-class entertainment to middle-class pas-
time. Before the mid-1930s, all-male Shengxian opera companies were reg-
ular features in entertainment halls and medium-size theaters in the
downtown area. In contrast, itinerant troupes and all-female troupes fre-
quented small teahouses and shabby theaters in the river-dock section of
Nanshi, where laborers and merchants from Ningbo and Shaoxing con-
centrated. Toward the late 1930s, as all-female troupes became increasingly
popular, they moved out of teahouses and into theaters. According to the
Shanghai Yue Opera Gazetteer, around and after 1936, all-female troupes per-
formed mostly in small and medium-size theaters, all-male and mixed
troupes in entertainment halls.
7 Then, after the Battle of Shanghai, all-female
troupes soon moved into a dozen or so medium-size theaters, while all-male
troupes disappeared.
8
Upon entering medium-size theaters, the better all-female troupes were
able to draw a large number of middle-class men and especially women,
108 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 130 ===

while the lower-class constituency remained in the teahouses with the itin-
erant troupes. Zhang Rongbiao and Zhang Yanqiu, an elderly couple liv-
ing in Chongren, Shengxian, performed Shengxian opera in Shanghai
during the 1930s until the outbreak of the Battle of Shanghai in August
1937 . They both stated that roughly equal numbers of men and women
attended the all-male or mixed Shengxian opera shows. Older people were
the most frequent visitors, while large numbers of middle-aged men also
attended. Zhang Yanqiu, who performed with both male-dominant and
all-female companies, added that more men than women attended per-
formances by all-female troupes. Why? Her explanation was that men
wanted to take advantage of young actresses: “I had a husband and was
thus spared. If not, men would probably have also come after me.”
9 Other
informants supported her description of the gender composition of audi-
ences, although they did not necessarily give the same reason. Xiao-Bai
Yumei, an actress who performed in place of her father with an all-male com-
pany in the New World entertainment hall in the mid-1930s, also described
an audience of mixed gender and age.
10 This situation began to change with
the rise of all-female troupes in the late 1930s. Shaoxing Opera Daily(Shaox-
ingxi bao), a tabloid published by a few Yue opera patrons, described the
relationship between the popularity of all-female troupes, the places where
they performed, and the growth of the female and middle-class audience
in 1941:
All-female troupes were active in small teahouses in the French concession,
Nanshi, and Xiaonanmen districts. Seats were cheap, only one dime or two.
Women went after all-female troupes like ﬂocks of ducks. All-female troupes
then swept through Shanghai. Although all-female troupes were popular,
the pitiful fact was that they mostly performed in small teahouses and there-
fore lacked a respectable audience. To change this situation, they began
gradual reforms while moving into performing halls in larger inns. The
 Commercial Inn in Nichengqiao was the ﬁrst to host all-female troupes, and
the Great Chinese Theater [Da Zhonghua] on Fuzhou Road was the sec-
ond. The reformed theaters adopted a new seating system in which the
viewer took a seat with a number that matched the number on the ticket;
this practice attracted many upper-class spectators. Then theaters raised
ticket prices to forty cents and competed for contracts with famous stars.
New plays were staged, elaborate costumes were added, and the theater
became full of vitality. The name of “ didu opera” has since then been
Patrons and Patronage  109

=== PDF PAGE 131 ===

imprinted on the minds of Shanghai residents. Now not only Shaoxing
natives care about the opera; people of various native-place origins all love
it and go to see it.
11
The relationship between Shanghai’s modern theater and the increasing
number of women opera spectators described here is of special importance.
The veteran Yue opera director Han Yi pointed out that there were few
public places in Republican Shanghai where women could engage in social
activities. Dance halls and popular music cafés that featured girls who
danced with customers as well as female singers were designed to enter-
tain modern men and were not appropriate for respectable women. Movie
theaters were mostly a meeting place for young lovers, and teahouses tradi -
tionally were a place for men. Opera theaters therefore became one of very
few public places for women and facilitated the increase in female opera -
goers by providing a venue where women could enjoy the opera and social-
ize while maintaining a sense of propriety.
During the course of reform in the 1940s, Yue opera became a regular
feature of some ﬁrst-rate large theaters, such as the Nine-Star Theater and
the Star Theater, which both had about nine hundred seats, compared to
the four hundred seats provided at the Dalai Theater. According to Han Yi
and Cheng Rong, both members of Yuan Xuefen’s reform staff in the 1940s,
New Yue Opera attracted younger, better-educated, and increasingly
female viewers. Cheng commented, “The core of the audience consisted
of young housewives around forty. They were educated, ﬁnancially well
off, and had plenty of time. They often brought their daughters, friends,
and mothers to the theater. Most men came as women’s companions. Older
audience members such as my mother had difﬁculty understanding the
new plays we put on during the reform.”
12 According to Han Yi:
During the Japanese occupation [1942–45], the level of the audience was
not high because of the low level of the venue [the Dalai Theater]. At the
time, Yue opera had already established a stable group of female viewers, and
middle-school girls were already a signiﬁcant part of the constituency—a con-
stituency of petty intellectuals began to develop. Shortly before the victory
over Japan and through the late 1940s, as the company [Xuesheng Company]
entered ﬁrst-rate theaters, such as the Nine-Star, Star, and Grand Shanghai,
the level of the audience rose further to include some college students. . . .
A large part of Yue opera’s audience at that time consisted of middle-
school girls and some boys, middle-class housewives and concubines of upper-
110 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 132 ===

class men. Men were also many, mostly medium or small merchants, shop
hands, ofﬁce workers, and functionaries....  I n  the postwar period, large com-
panies in Shanghai had a concentration of petty intellectuals who loved Yue
opera.
13
The testimony of Cheng Rong and Han Yi as well as other evidence indi-
cate that Yue opera’s constituency in mid-twentieth-century Shanghai was
made up of the middle class, including lower-middle-class male clerks and
upper-class housewives and concubines, and women across class lines. To
put Yue opera’s constituency in some perspective, the considerable num-
ber of upper-class women patrons gave the opera prestige vis-à-vis other
local operas, such as Shanghai opera and Huai opera, but did not match
the distinguished status upper-class men brought to Beijing opera and intel-
lectual elite men brought to spoken drama. Compared to lowbrow enter-
tainment such as Shanghai opera and Huai opera, on the one hand, and
spoken drama, on the other, Yue opera was in the middle in terms of the
educational level of its audience. Yue opera’s directors and playwrights in
the 1940s and 1950s were mostly petty intellectuals with high school edu-
cations, while its constituency had an average middle-school education.
Although college students were more likely to be attracted to spoken drama,
common folks with primary-school or lower educations made up the basic
audiences for Shanghai opera and Huai opera, respectively.
14 Mainstream
Yue opera thus can be characterized as a middlebrow entertainment for
Shanghai’s vast middle class, both men and women, with a medium level
of education, while lowbrow troupes served a lower-class constituency,
mostly at the city peripheries.
15
The Native-Place Factor
Republican-period Shanghai was a rapidly developing industrial and  com -
mercial center with a swiftly growing population. Among the roughly four
million people in Shanghai in the late 1930s, less than one-fourth were
Shanghai natives. Immigrants from northern and southern Jiangsu, Zhe-
jiang, and Guangdong constituted the majority of the city’s population;
the rest were from Anhui, Jiangxi, Shandong, and other provinces.
16 In big
cities like Shanghai, which could be intimidating to newcomers from small
towns and the countryside, immigrants from the same area tended to stick
together on the basis of native bonds strengthened by shared local dialects,
common customs and habits, behavior codes, and nostalgic sentimental-
Patrons and Patronage    111

=== PDF PAGE 133 ===

ity. For practical reasons, immigrants relied on native-place ties to help them
operate in the city and to ﬁnd friends, work, and places to stay. People from
the same native place thus tended to hold similar jobs and congregated in
the same areas.
17 Yet the uneven economic development in various regions
of China meant that immigrants from better-developed areas, such as Zhe-
jiang and southern Jiangsu, came more prepared to compete for jobs in the
city compared to those from less developed areas, such as northern Jiangsu
(Subei) and Anhui. Thus, native-place segregation compounded by class
stratiﬁcation informed a hierarchical structure in the popular politics of
native-place identity, popular culture, and business operation that put
Ningbo-Shaoxing natives at the top and Subei people at the bottom.
18
Poor Subei immigrants typically took up coolie jobs in the city, such as
rickshaw pullers, waste collectors, porters, and other types of low-paid work-
ers. Because of this, Subei people were generally stereotyped, stigmatized,
and discriminated against in urban Shanghai. Factory workers from Subei
usually took up the lowest-paying and toughest physical work. Subei natives,
for example, constituted the majority of the workforce in silk reeling mills
19
and performed the most menial jobs in cotton mills. 20 Even an educated
Subei person found it difﬁcult to locate a good job because of his easily
identiﬁable accent.
21 Shanghai natives, generally speaking, were not highly
represented in the middle and upper classes either. Many engaged in petty
trade and odd jobs. 
In contrast, a great number of immigrants from Guangdong, southern
Jiangsu, and Zhejiang came with more ﬁnancial resources and consequently
were better educated and better situated in business, factories, government,
public service, and educational institutions. While factory workers from
these areas usually found skilled work at higher pay, such as silk weaving
and knitting,
22 educated persons from these areas occupied the majority
of white-collar positions. A 1941 survey of white-collar employees in the
Shanghai Public Service Bureau shows only 16 Shanghai natives out of a
total of 238, along with 44 Zhejiang natives, 85 Jiangsu natives, and 62
Guangdong natives.
23
Zhejiang and southern Jiangsu immigrants composed the largest part of
Shanghai’s business class, intellectuals, and white-collar employees. Partic-
ularly well known was the near monopoly of the native banking business
by the Ningbo-Shaoxing immigrant group, known as the Ning-Shao
clique.
24 Several Japanese investigations pointed out the rapid growth of
the Ning-Shao clique’s ﬁnancial power during the 1920s and 1930s in rela-
tion to the formerly dominant Guangdong group. By the late 1930s, the
112 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 134 ===

Ning-Shao clique surpassed the Guangdong clique in its share of power to
become ascendant in Shanghai’s native banking system.25 One study shows
that, in 1941, among the larger native banks with capital in excess of 100,000
yuan, twenty-two belonged to the Ning-Shao clique, six belonged to the
Shandong clique, ﬁve were Cantonese, and four were controlled by Shang-
hai natives.
26 The power of Ning-Shao immigrants becomes even more obvi-
ous when one realizes that three among the “four famous men in Shanghai”
(Haishang sida wenren) were from the Ningbo-Shaoxing area. The godfather
of the Green Gang, Huang Jinrong, was from Yuyao; the famous business-
man Yu Qiaqing was from Ningbo; and the onetime president of the Shang-
hai Chamber of Commerce, Wang Xiaolai, was a Shengxian native. Only
Du Yuesheng was a Shanghai native.
27
Native-place economy and politics directly inﬂuenced the economy and
politics of Shanghai’s culture. Various native cuisines, dress, dialects, and
operas competed with one another to deﬁne the city’s cultural landscape.
Not coincidentally, the rise of the Ning-Shao bankers paralleled the emer-
gence of women’s Yue opera. As Ningbo-Shaoxing economic and politi-
cal power laid the foundation for its native opera, the success of the opera
in turn symbolized Ningbo-Shaoxing hegemony in the city. Yue opera not
only became the most popular genre in Shanghai but also came to repre-
sent Shanghai-Jiangnan culture in China, while neither Shanghai opera nor
Jiangbei opera ever gained such national recognition. The modern Shang-
hai dialect was ﬁrst inﬂuenced by the Suzhou dialect and later by the Ningbo
dialect. The famous modern Shanghai term ehle,meaning “we,” for example,
originated in Ningbo dialect but has represented a proud Shanghainese
identity since the mid-twentieth century.
The support of Ning-Shao immigrants was crucial to the increased promi-
nence of women’s Yue opera in “island” Shanghai in the late 1930s and early
1940s. With a steady inﬂux of war refugees from adjacent areas, the pop-
ulation reached ﬁve million, and local operas—Yue opera, Shanghai opera,
and Huai opera in particular—ﬂourished.
28 As local operas drew audiences
mainly from their native-place immigrants, the superior position of Ning-
Shao immigrants gave Yue opera an edge. Ning-Shao immigrants promoted
their native opera in several ways. Ning-Shao men of letters wrote new
plays for the opera and put together tabloid publications and fan maga-
zines to promote it, while Ning-Shao businessmen and their wives bought
expensive stage costumes and paraphernalia for the opera’s stars. Finally,
a loyal cross section of the Ning-Shao audience paid for tickets that cost
more than tickets for other local operas. 
Patrons and Patronage    113

=== PDF PAGE 135 ===

In 1939, Yue opera tickets were the most expensive among local operas,
with the exception of Beijing opera. A ticket for a Yue opera show cost
ﬁfty cents, but one for Jiangbei opera was only ten cents; Shanghai opera
performed in entertainment halls cost twenty cents plus the entrance fee,
but admission to a Yue opera was an additional forty cents. Yue opera could
charge more because its audience had a higher median income compared
to audiences for Shanghai and Jiangbei opera, and it was also more popu-
lar. Especially important for women’s opera was the large group of Ning-
Shao upper- and middle-class housewives and daughters, who had both
the time and the money to frequent the theater. The Shanghai-native mid-
dle class was proportionately smaller, and the Subei-native middle class was
very small. This large core middle-class female audience steadily channeled
the ﬁnancial resources of Ning-Shao immigrants to Yue opera, providing
the opera with a ﬁnancial base that far surpassed those of other local operas. 
Yue opera’s superior ﬁnancial situation enabled it to invest more in its
productions, and higher production values in turn attracted more viewers.
For example, Yao Shuijuan’s 1940 play The Romantic Death of Jiang the Fifth
(Jiang Laowu xunqing ji), scripted and directed by Fan Li and staged at the
Queen’s Great Theater, used realistic stage sets for the ﬁrst time in Yue opera
history, with an actual rickshaw and boat as well as realistic buildings appear-
ing onstage. These unusual stage properties cost so much that the theater
had to raise its prices by 20 percent. But the play was a sensation, and the
ﬁrst run lasted sixty-three performances.
29 A few such major productions
were enough to establish Yao Shuijuan as the top star in Yue opera.
Similarly, Yue opera actresses had the resources to dress well onstage as
a result of their higher incomes, which helped maintain their theater’s higher
value vis-à-vis other operas and their actors. During the Republican period,
costumes were the responsibility and personal property of the actors. Actors
had to make themselves appear attractive and digniﬁed onstage; otherwise,
they could lose their popularity or even their positions. The pressure to
dress well onstage was high, and many ordinary actors were hard pressed
to keep up with expectations. As Yue opera’s popularity gave its actresses,
especially the leading actresses, considerable incomes, they could afford
such expenses, unlike their counterparts in other local operas. Revenues
from ticket sales encouraged theater bosses to invest more willingly in
improving stage properties and theaters as a whole. 
All these factors added up to an enhanced outlook for Yue opera the-
ater, which gained higher status in the public eye. Within a few years, Yue
opera emerged as an urban modern theater and overtook Beijing opera to
114 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 136 ===

become the most popular opera in the region, attracting a mass urban audi-
ence that crossed native-place, gender, and class lines. In 1941, an observer
pointed out in Shaoxing Opera Daily: “Now not only Shaoxing natives care
about the opera. People of various native-place origins all love it and go
to see it.” Also in 1941, Shaoxing Opera Dailystated: “Before the war, 70 per-
cent of the audience for Shaoxing civil drama [one of the many names for
Yue opera] were Shaoxing natives and 30 percent Ningbo natives. After
the war broke out, Shaoxing natives composed only 40 percent of the whole
audience, and Ningbo natives 30 percent, while other natives increased to
30 percent. In this year, non-Ningbo-Shaoxing-native audience members
have increased to 60 percent.”
30 Though these statistics are difﬁcult to ver-
ify, the Yue opera audience’s historical expansion among various natives
from the Jiangnan region is undeniable. Further evidence shows that Yue
opera also began to attract attention from the mainstream media as, per-
haps for the ﬁrst time in its history, Shanghai Newspaper carried a positive
commentary on Yue opera on May 3, 1941.
31 Initially an opera of Ning-
Shao natives, Yue opera was being transformed into a general urban spec-
tacle as it simultaneously grew into a distinctly women’s opera in 1940s
Shanghai. 
Women Going to the Opera
Women made up the majority of Yue opera’s audience in Shanghai in the
mid-twentieth century. They were by far the most enthusiastic spectators,
fans, and patrons. Although men constituted nearly half of the audience,
it was the new female audience members who invigorated women’s Yue
opera and helped make it a great popular-culture phenomenon. 
Going to the opera could be quite an urban experience for women who
had not long ago achieved the right to enjoy themselves in the public space
and view commercial entertainment. Besides their strong preference for
romantic love stories, a specialty of women’s Yue opera, women loved to
attend Yue opera shows for a variety of social reasons. Going to the opera
expanded women’s horizons, exposing them to other sorts of urban expe-
riences. Riding a trolley bus, rickshaw, or private motorcar, walking among
the crowds on paved sidewalks between handsome high-rises, and passing
through the urban scene represented quite an adventure. Operagoing, like
shopping (and window-shopping) at downtown department stores, was
recreation for urban women, a refreshing break in their routines. Oppor-
tunities for socializing were another beneﬁt of operagoing, as women usu-
Patrons and Patronage    115

=== PDF PAGE 137 ===

ally attended plays with female companions. Knowledge of the opera, the
play, and the actresses provided good fodder for conversation; one could
even show off if one’s companions were less knowledgeable. Women also
obtained a great deal of information from the variety of shows with themes
ranging from contemporary social sensation (The Romantic Death of Jiang the
Fifth, 1940), to patriotic epic (Hua Mulan, 1939), to the lives of workers in
remote areas (Daughter of a Border T own[Biancheng nüer], 1943), to exotic
ethnic subjects (Desert Prince, 1947) in addition to great love stories about
famous historical and ﬁctional personalities. Enthusiastic fans used the
opportunity to try out their organizational skills with group activities and
amateur performances. For the rich, patronage was a way of deploying their
superior status and economic power in public. In short, going to the opera
represented an opportunity for women to engage the world at large, to cross
the boundaries of the family and the factory, and even to develop identi-
ties apart from their social stations.
The Economics of Viewing Opera
Women’s Yue opera appealed to women from various backgrounds, includ-
ing middle-class housewives and schoolgirls, factory workers, businesswomen
and merchants, and, later, students and professional women. In other words,
in the middle decades of the twentieth century, women’s Yue opera attracted
a broad cross section of the female population in Shanghai. 
Factory workers made up a considerable part of the lower- to middle-
class audience for Yue opera in entertainment halls and small theaters.
32 A
1939 study done by a group of communist labor workers, Shanghai’s Indus-
tries and Workers(Shanghai chanye yu Shanghai zhigong), provides precious
ﬁrsthand observations of workers’ lives as well as valuable statistics.33 The
study states that among Shanghai’s 600,000 industrial workers in 1939, cot-
ton mill workers numbered more than 100,000, and silk-knitting and silk-
weaving workers were estimated at more than 40,000 each.
34 The majority
of these workers were women. 
To understand the economics of viewing opera for lower- and middle-
class audiences, it is helpful to put wages and opera ticket prices in per-
spective. The average wage of cotton mill workers was ﬁfty cents (half a
yuan) per day—certainly not a lavish sum. The workers were mostly from
southern and northern Jiangsu, although some were Shanghai natives.
35 On
weekends, workers went out for fun in groups. Many went to see Jiangbei
opera in theaters where the price of a ticket was ten cents, about one-ﬁfth
116 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 138 ===

an average daily wage; others spent twelve cents to see Shanghai story-
telling.36 Workers who earned less income could see the same entertain-
ment for just a few cents at the West Shanghai Great World, an open-air
fairground that regularly featured three Beijing opera troupes, two Jiang-
bei operas, one Shanghai local-dialect recitation, one magic show, two mar-
tial arts performances, and one storytelling show.
37 Yue opera was not
performed there, indicating the lack of interest among cotton-mill work-
ers, mostly non–Zhejiang natives, before 1939. By the early PRC years,
however, cotton-mill workers composed a large portion of Yue opera fans,
evidence of a growing interest in the genre among these non–Zhejiang
natives during the intervening decade.
The factory workers among the Yue opera audience during the Repub-
lican period were predominantly from silk-knitting and silk-weaving mills,
both among the better-paying industries. According to the 1939 Shang-
hai’s Industries and Workers, workers’ daily wages ranged from an average of
forty cents in silk-reeling mills to ninety cents at the French-owned trol-
ley bus company. An average daily wage for workers in silk-weaving mills
was eighty cents, and workers in knitting mills earned sixty cents a day.
38
The study also reveals a signiﬁcant correlation between workers’ native
places and their wages: the majority of silk-knitting workers were from
Shaoxing and Ningbo,
39 while the better-paid workers in silk-weaving mills
were natives of Zhejiang’s sericulture area, including Shengxian, Xinchang,
Dongyang, Hangzhou, and  Shao xing.
40 These workers enjoyed visiting
entertainment halls to watch local operas, and their native Yue opera was
their favorite entertainment. Many liked to sing, and some serious ama-
teurs occasionally organized performances for their own and their fellow
workers’ amusement.
41 Workers generally were able to purchase access to
some type of performance, depending on their personal budgets. In Octo-
ber 1939, one of the most popular shows, staged by the famous Xiao Dan-
gui and her troupe in the Old Dam Theater, charged ﬁfty cents a ticket,
42
while the entrance fee for the Great World was twenty-two cents. 43 It
seemed that male workers found entertainment halls more attractive, prob-
ably for the dynamic atmosphere and varieties of entertainment, but
female workers favored inexpensive seats in theaters, perhaps because they
preferred to quietly enjoy the show.
44
Shanghai’s Industries and Workers does not mention gender differentiation
among operagoers, which suggests that both male and female workers
enjoyed local operas from their native regions. By the early PRC period,
female workers had become the more enthusiastic fans of Yue opera. This
Patrons and Patronage    117

=== PDF PAGE 139 ===

conforms to other sources that argue for the growing portion of female, as
well as non-Zhejiang-native, audiences in the 1940s and 1950s. Indeed,
the increase in these sectors of the Yue opera audience made Yue opera the
most popular opera in modern Shanghai.
Female domestic helpers and servants constituted another group of Yue
opera’s loyal customers. The writer Wei Shaochang, a Shaoxing native and
the son of Wei Jinshan, the executive manager of the Zhonghui Bank owned
by Du Yuesheng, recalled his childhood encounter with Yue opera in the
1930s. His nanny loved Yue opera and often made the little boy ask his
mother for permission and money to go see the opera at the Great World
so that she could go with him. Little Wei liked to go, too, for the excite-
ment and the delicious snacks sold at the entertainment hall.
45
Children also attended Yue opera shows. Unlike Beijing opera, Yue opera
theaters admitted small children for free, perhaps a necessary accommo-
dation to women spectators. Children exposed to Yue opera at a young age
often carried their interest in the opera into adulthood. Wei Shaochang
later became the editor of several Yue opera fan magazines and tabloids,
including Shaoxing Opera Daily.
46 Wu Ping, a lifetime Yue opera fan who
nurtured her granddaughter’s interest in learning the art of Yue opera, had
her own ﬁrst contact with the opera in her preschool years as the com-
panion of a young lady in her neighborhood. Later, during her adolescence,
she often went to see Yue opera with a girlfriend. The two girls rode in one
rickshaw and shared a seat in the theater—Yue opera theaters allowed two
children to enter for one ticket.
47
Middle-class housewives and daughters were the core audience for
women’s opera. Republican Shanghai’s middle and lower middle classes con-
sisted of roughly two groups: one was made up of self-employed merchants
and shop owners, and the other of white-collar employees. Self-employed
merchants were a traditional feature of the urban economic structure, and
their numbers were great. Cheng Rong’s father, for example, was a mer-
chant whose income was sufﬁcient to provide Cheng with an education
through middle school, but her admission to teacher’s college (equivalent
to high school but subsidized by the government, which provided a small
stipend plus a tuition waiver) no doubt relieved the stress on family
ﬁnances.
48 For women from lower-middle-class families, attending Yue opera
shows might require some special effort. According to Zhang Xingzhou, a
merchant from Ningbo, the average Ningbo immigrant in Shanghai lived
a frugal life. Though the women usually did not work outside the home,
there was always plenty of work to do—cleaning, doing laundry, attend-
118 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 140 ===

ing to sideline family businesses, caring for children, shopping, and cook-
ing.49 Ningbo immigrants were notorious for their miserly ways, and
Ningbo women were discouraged from going out and spending money.
The frequent Yue operagoers, Zhang remarked, were those who had both
money and leisure. By this, he meant upper-class women.
50
Shanghai’s white-collar employees, according to Shanghai’s Industries and
Workers, outnumbered those in the rest of China—approximately 300,000
in three economic sectors. About 140,000 worked in traditional-style shops,
about 100,000 in foreign-owned businesses, and about 50,000 in modern
institutions owned by native capitalists. In the Chinese sectors, an average
monthly salary for junior employees, who made up more than half the white-
collar workforce, was between ten and twenty yuan, lower than the wages
of average factory workers; an average salary for mid-level employees was
about thirty yuan per month, except for some higher-paid employees in
the ﬁnancial sector. An average salary for mid-level bank employees, for
example, was between ﬁfty to sixty yuan per month. Employees of the
Shanghai China Bank were by far the best paid.
51 The authors do not give
a salary range for the one-third of white-collar workers who were employed
in foreign-owned businesses; however, they clearly indicate that salaries
in this sector tended to be higher than in Chinese sectors. 
Another set of numbers from 1941 also helps us make sense of the eco-
nomics of viewing Yue opera in wartime Shanghai. According to the Shang-
hai Public Service Bureau’s annual report, the salaries for 232 white-collar
employees in June 1941 ranged from 40 to 180 yuan per month, and 225
blue-collar employees earned from 22 to 60 yuan.
52 Meanwhile, Yue opera
tickets ranged from 80 cents to 1 yuan and 20 cents in 1941. In either case,
viewing Yue opera may not have been cheap, but at the same time, it was
still affordable for middle-class families. 
Middle-class men and women tended to have received better educations
in modern schools, and the education gap between them and the lower
class could not be ignored. The authors of Shanghai’s Industries and Workers
explain: 
China’s modern industry has less than thirty years of history. As the rural
economy disintegrated, blue-collar workers came mainly from poor peasant
families, while white-collar employees came mainly from landlord and rich
peasant families. The former were less educated and the latter better edu-
cated. In addition, in our country, industries that need skilled workers capa-
ble of handling complicated technologies are relatively few. This has
Patrons and Patronage    119

=== PDF PAGE 141 ===

resulted in a big gap in educational levels between the white-collar and blue-
collar workers and consequently divides them into two social categories.53
The two categories of workers corresponded with divisions in native-place
origins. Natives of the Jiangnan region constituted a large proportion of
Shanghai’s college students and intellectuals as well as its entrepreneurs and
white-collar workers. Although many white-collar men were not interested
in Yue opera, they did not mind letting the women in their families enjoy
it. The father of Yue opera fan Wu Ping, for example, was a college gradu-
ate who worked for the customs service during the 1940s. He had no inter-
est in Yue opera or any other local operas, but he did not mind giving his
daughter permission and money to attend Yue opera shows. According to
Wu Ping, the four family members each had his or her own favorite pas-
time. Her father read, her mother played mahjong, her older sister loved
pop songs, and she herself was crazy about Yue opera.
54 Middle-class women
were fond of going to see Yue opera. A new bride in Wu Ping’s neighbor-
hood often went to see Yue opera, most frequently in the afternoons, when
her husband was at work, but also sometime in the evenings, leaving her
husband home alone. The well-known female writer Su Qing, a Ningbo
native, admitted that attending opera was her favorite pastime.
55
The Fans
Finally, later during the 1940s, a new group, and, in a sense, a new gener-
ation, of Yue opera fans appeared. They were schoolgirls, female college
students, some female professionals, and new middle-class housewives, all
educated in the modern school system with Republican ideas of equal rights
for women, nationalism, and modernity. By the postwar period, the Repub-
lican educational system had made school education for middle-class girls
commonplace and college education a possibility. This generation endowed
the opera with new prestige as well as new stimulus for further reform. Cheng
Rong, the ﬁrst woman playwright for Yue opera, and Chen Shulian, the Yue
opera radio announcer, both graduated from teacher’s schools (equivalent
to high school) and taught primary school before they joined Yuan Xue-
fen’s company. Teng Jiazhen and her husband Song Zhiyou, both account-
ants and graduates of Dongwu University, were enthusiastic Yue opera
supporters. During the late 1940s and throughout the 1950s, Teng held mid-
 night snack parties at her home for actresses after their evening shows. She
also taught them to read and write. As a professional, Teng emphasized in
120 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 142 ===

interviews that she was not an old-fashioned adoptive mother, nor one of the
obsessed Yue opera fans.She just wanted to help the actresses.The actresses
in fact addressed Teng as “teacher.”56 Many middle-school boys and girls as
well as college students became Yue opera regulars; known as the “triangle
brand audience,” for they all wore triangular school badges, they were the
pride of New Yue Opera as they embodied the opera’s modernity.
Many of these young women were attracted to women’s opera for rea-
sons similar to those of their mothers’ generation. Chen Shulian commented: 
At the beginning, I was not interested in Yue opera or any local operas
[because local operas seemed vulgar and old-fashioned]. I had been a big
movie fan. I became attracted to Yue opera after I befriended Yuan Xuefen,
when she came to our station for a Yue opera radio program. The people
from the Xuesheng Company were different from those of other local opera
companies. Shanghai opera, Suzhou story-singing, and Shanghai comic
shows all performed on radio programs at our station. Even well-known actors
from Shanghai opera behaved just like lower-class folks in the marketplace,
with cigarettes on their lips all the time. Only people from the Xuesheng
Company looked respectable.
57
That was how Chen got involved with the Xuesheng Company and fell in
love with the reformed Yue opera.
Fan-club activities, which began in the early 1940s, reveal how Yue opera
served young women’s needs for socializing and personal development in
the modern context. The appearance of several fan clubs in the late 1940s
signaled young women’s self-conscious efforts to forge a community.
Through fan-club activities, women created a social space in which par-
ticipants could express their individual opinions and make decisions regard-
ing their clubs’ affairs. Fans indeed openly criticized and argued with one
another in tabloids, fan publications, and meetings, often unable to agree
on what should be done and how. Although admittedly frustrated by this
situation, members nonetheless took great pleasure in getting together with
other women with the same interests, exercising control and inﬂuence at
the same time. These fan clubs seem to have achieved very little of what
the members wanted, but they provided a space where young women could
develop a sense of their social selves while learning social and organiza-
tional skills.
One interesting feature of these fan clubs was the women’s attempt to
exclude men. Female fans’ monopoly over fan clubs indicates not only their
Patrons and Patronage    121

=== PDF PAGE 143 ===

enthusiasm for Yue opera but also their desire for a social space of their
own, free from male intervention. The women, consciously or not, tried to
expand their horizon beyond the home and school and did so in deﬁance
of male social dominance. It was to a certain extent a subversive practice,
though it took place on the periphery of society and did arouse some male
protest. One commentator, responding negatively to women’s monopoly
of fan clubs, wrote about the establishment of a fan club for Fan Ruijuan,
a popular young male impersonator, in the weekly tabloid Yue Opera News
(Yueju bao): 
According to the Founding Manifesto of the Fan Ruijuan Club [Juan She],
it seems that the guiding principle is to support Fan Ruijuan, enhance Fan’s
art, and associate all the Fan fans in fellowship with one another. If this is
to be the principle, then all the Fan fans, men and women, should be able to
join the club. It goes without saying that it is contradictory for the club to
limit its membership to women only. From this case, one can see how nar-
row-minded women are.
58
Another interview with the club’s president, Dong Qian, by a woman named
Xu Fangfeng, probably a freelancer for the tabloid and a Yue opera fan her-
self, offers a general sense of the purpose and attitudes of these fan-club
members. According to Dong:
The Fan Ruijuan Club now has more than 120 members. There are fourteen
volunteer workers; though the number is not great, we do not feel any lack
of personnel because everyone works hard. Members go to see the shows
on their own and convene when there is business to discuss. As for enter-
tainment, members all suggest that I organize fan-club performances because
everyone likes to sing. But organizing an amateur performance is not an easy
thing. There are plenty of ﬁve-minute enthusiasts among Yue opera fans. In
addition, we should not draw lines between one another if we want to per-
form together. In Shanghai, there are amateur performance clubs for Beijing
opera; Yue opera as the local number one certainly should have these clubs.
[I] am now writing a play for Miss Fan, tentatively titled Lonely Figure under
the Autumn Moon [Qiuyue guying]. It’s just an enjoyment for myself.
59
Dong Qian is obviously a well-educated, young, single woman from a
well-to-do family—typical of the new generation of middle- and upper-
middle-class young women fans in Shanghai in the mid-twentieth century.
122 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 144 ===

Patronage
Republican Shanghai, largely due to its semicolonial economy and politi-
cal system, was home to a large, mixed upper class composed of newly
afﬂuent entrepreneurs, high-ranking business professionals, high ofﬁcials,
the town strongmen, and the city’s fading old aristocrats and rural mag-
nates. During the turbulent years of the ﬁrst half of the century, Shang-
hai’s foreign settlements attracted rich aristocrats and modern intellectuals
alike with its exotic and extravagant lifestyle while providing a safe haven
for refugees ﬂeeing political persecution, warfare, and famine. Many lived
decadent lives, preoccupied with opium smoking and the company of cour-
tesans and opera actors. The young novelist Zhang Ailing painstakingly
describes in her ﬁction the lives of the declining elite in Shanghai’s foreign
settlements, witnessing the hopeless and self-indulgent existence of her
father, stepmother, and other relatives.
60
Patronizing and consorting with actors were traditionally prerogatives of
upper-class men; the privilege was challenged during the Republican period
when women entered into the practice. With the rise of minor operas, espe-
cially women’s Yue opera, a new gendered division of upper-class patronage
appeared. While upper-class men customarily attended Beijing opera and
patronized famous Beijing opera actors, the women socialized with Yue opera
actors and actresses. Upper-class women’s patronage of Yue opera began
in the 1920s with the establishment of the all-male Shengxian opera in
Shanghai and became a popular-culture phenomenon with women’s Yue
opera during the middle decades. Thus, for example, while Huang Jinrong,
the king of Shanghai’s Green Gang, was a great patron of Beijing opera, his
daughter-in-law was the adoptive mother of Xiao Dangui, the famous Yue
opera star. As housewives who did not have independent social status apart
from that of their husbands, these women did not have a formal role to play
in the public domain. Thus, for them, more than for men, going to the the-
ater and patronizing actors were not merely entertaining activities but also
a means of socializing, crossing boundaries, and empowering themselves. 
Women transgressing gender boundaries in modern Shanghai was a
favorite topic of public gossip. During the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries, when women were not supposed to appear in public enter-
tainment venues, courtesans attended Beijing opera plays in foreign
settlements; many became romantically involved with famous actors, while
some caused scandals. Even though the male-centered public culture ren-
dered them objects of male sexual desire, courtesans were able to turn the
Patrons and Patronage    123

=== PDF PAGE 145 ===

tables by making actors the targets of their own sexual desire, often at the
expense of their male customers.61 During the early Republican period, when
operagoing became a legitimate pastime for women, upper-class wives—
mostly courtesans who had become concubines—also began to have sex-
ual liaisons with actors. When all-male Shengxian opera became popular
in Shanghai during the 1920s and 1930s, upper-class women from the
Shaoxing-Ningbo area did indeed take advantage of the naive young actors
from the countryside. 
In interviews, the Yue opera actress Xiao-Bai Yumei emphasized that her
father, a famous female impersonator and renowned as Mei Lanfang in the
all-male Shengxian opera, was never corrupted and stated that he was
unusual in this regard.
62 Xiao-Bai Yumei inherited the famous name of her
father when she took over his role in 1933 at the age of twelve and per-
formed with popular actors of the time. Many famous actors smoked opium
and had liaisons with rich concubines, and some became victims of their
own decadent lifestyles. Xiao-Bai Yumei recalled a young man named Gao
Yuesheng, a popular star specializing in young male roles and Xiao-Bai
Yumei’s stage partner. Gao was at the peak of his career when the two per-
formed at the New World in the mid-1930s. Gao, however, indulged him-
self in liaisons with rich men’s concubines. Every day, as soon as the show
was over, there was always a car awaiting him outside. He obviously had
more than one lover. As time passed, the quality of his performance and
voice deteriorated, and eventually he had to quit. He died at the age of
twenty-seven. Xiao-Bai did not see how it could have been possible for an
actor to perform two shows every day while entangled in an excessive sex-
ual life. She was not speciﬁc about the cause of Gao’s death, perhaps because
it was obvious to her that he simply overextended and exhausted himself.
63
Gao’s story provides an interesting case in which multiple transgressions
of class and gender boundaries occurred. On the one hand, the actor under-
mined the elite’s supremacy by seducing their women and consuming their
wealth. The concubines, on the other hand, ridiculed male sexual domi-
nance and male authority by enjoying the actor’s sexuality at their hus-
bands’ expense. Concubines were able to engage in such sexual activity
behind their husbands’ backs largely because it was common Republican
era practice to maintain concubines in separate dwellings, away from prin-
cipal wives and children. Young concubines who had been courtesans and
did not have children were most likely to initiate extramarital affairs.
64 A
principal wife usually shunned sexual escapades, perhaps because her stake
in the family was greater.
124 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 146 ===

Deﬁance and transgression always had their limits and were subject to
punishment in Republican Shanghai. Unlike rich courtesans, who had more
autonomy over their own sexuality, concubines as well as principal wives
owed their status and ﬁnancial well-being to their husbands, who possessed
certain prerogatives with respect to the women’s sexuality. Thus, when
women’s opera and its actresses became publicly accessible, both concu-
bines and principal wives turned to these sources of legitimate involvement.
Concerned primarily with the well-being of the familial and social struc-
ture, the Chinese patriarchal system was largely silent on intimate rela-
tionships between women, which seemingly posed no threat to patriarchal
authority. As Xiao-Bai Yumei explained, husbands were not worried when
their wives became passionate about women’s Yue opera and close to the
actresses because these were “just women’s things.” Nothing serious could
happen between women—meaning there could not be a scandal resulting
from public misbehavior or pregnancy. Homosexual relations were rare and
of little concern, she believed. In fact, husbands were at ease when their
wives and daughters were attending women’s opera and consorting with
opera actresses.
65
Women’s opera also attracted upper-class wives because of the absence
of male performers. In most other performing groups—such as other local
operas, cinema, and spoken drama—actors and actresses worked and
sometimes lived together day and night. This was to some extent a pro-
fessional imperative, often compounded by ﬁnancial necessity, that pro-
voked titillation regarding modern lifestyles and suspicion of promiscuity
among the public. Sexual relationships between male and female stars were
a never-ending topic of tabloids and gossip, invoking the centuries-old
stereotype of actors as promiscuous. In contrast to the perceived promis-
cuity of other performing troupes, women’s Yue opera companies appeared
pure and clean, with a hint of virtue and chastity. Actresses, mostly unmar-
ried girls around twenty years of age from the countryside, looked as though
they were begging for protection from potential patrons, if not waiting to
be claimed.
66 Furthermore, the very absence of male actors backstage was
convenient for women patrons, permitting them to move in and out freely
and appropriate it as a woman’s space.
67
Adoptive Mothers and Sisters
“Adoptive motherhood” ( guofang niang) is a peculiar institution related to
wealthy women and their patronage of Yue opera actresses in modern
Patrons and Patronage    125

=== PDF PAGE 147 ===

Shanghai.68 It began with the appearance of women performers in Yue opera
in Shanghai in the 1930s and ended in the mid-1960s with the Cultural
Revolution, roughly the golden period of the opera in the city. An obscure
practice among Shanghai residents, adoptive motherhood became an insti-
tution within the context of Yue opera patronage. Generally, when a rich
patron decided to take her favorite star as an adoptive daughter, she would
select a date on which the ritual was to take place. For the ritual, which
was usually held at the adoptive mother’s home, the adoptive mother would
be seated when the adoptive daughter was brought in and knelt down before
her. The daughter kowtowed three times, thereby formally establishing
adoptive relations. The mother then presented the daughter with “gifts of
the ﬁrst meeting” ( jian mian li), which could include dresses, accessories,
stage costumes, or expensive jewels. Sometimes, the adoptive family would
even host a banquet to announce the adoption. Adoptive relations were
public and usually carried much prestige for both the mother and the daugh-
ter. For the mother, it was a way of showing off her wealth and status by
playing the role of protector of a star; for the actress, the relationship sym-
bolized access to the wealthy and powerful. Underneath the public and
symbolic meanings of the institution, the relationship itself could be as com-
plicated and diverse as any other. 
Upper-class patronage of Yue opera was important in shaping the
opera. Female patrons would take one or sometimes several of their favorite
actresses into adoptive relationships, showering them with gifts ranging
from cash, jewels, and offstage dresses, to stage costumes and decorations
made of embroidered brocade bearing the actresses’ names. The better and
more expensive the stage sets and costumes, the more prestige the adop-
tive mother gained in the public eye. Adoptive mothers also took care of
the actresses to varying degrees. They often took their adoptive daughters
home after evening performances and provided food for them, and actresses
sometimes stayed at their adoptive mothers’ homes for a few days or even
weeks. Some adoptive mothers even invited actresses to move in with them.
Often, an adoptive mother would buy a dozen or more front-row tickets
and invite friends and relatives to the actress’s show. Adoptive mothers could
also show off by taking their adoptive daughters, usually famous stars, to
perform at private gatherings.
69
The most exciting occasions, however, involved grand charity per-
formances, opportunities for adoptive mothers to show off their wealth and
power and for adoptive daughters to enhance their fame, ﬁnancial situa-
tions, and social esteem.
70 Charity performances were always held in ﬁrst-
126 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 148 ===

rate theaters with larger stages, more seats, and, most important, an
esteemed audience of celebrities who did not usually go to Yue opera the-
aters. Tabloid coverage and advertising for these charity performances were
profuse. As adoptive mothers called in to reserve tickets in the names of
their adoptive daughters, tabloids updated ticket sales daily, listing actresses’
names in order of the yuan amount and making the event into a public
pledge competition. The larger the yuan amount pledged to the star, the
more prestigious the star and her adoptive mother became. The rivalry con-
tinued onstage when actresses tried to display themselves at their best, in
terms of costumes and paraphernalia as well as performing skill. For these
reasons, both adoptive mothers and actresses considered participation in
a charity performance to be an honor and a chance to gain public expo-
sure while supporting a lofty cause.
The careers of the noted actresses Xiao-Bai Yumei and Yao Shuijuan illus-
trate how the adoptive mother system worked. Xiao-Bai Yumei’s adoptive
mother was the wife of He Lunzhang, a Ningbo native and comprador for
the American-owned Xinfu Trade Company. Xiao-Bai was introduced to
her adoptive mother by the woman’s daughter, a great fan of Xiao-Bai’s
who attended her performance every day after school. The family had three
private cars and employed seventeen domestic servants. Xiao-Bai’s adop-
tive mother was the principal wife, which explained why she could spend
so much money on Xiao-Bai. It seemed to be a point of pride for Xiao-Bai
that her adoptive mother was the principal wife. The adoptive mother was
very fond of the young Xiao-Bai Yumei, who was still a teenager. At the
adoption ritual, Xiao-Bai recalled, “My adoptive mother was so happy when
I called out loud ‘Mma!’ For that, she gave me a pearl necklace.”
71 Xiao-Bai
Yumei recalled with pride that, in the late 1930s, when she triumphed in
a charity performance, her adoptive mother gave her seventeen taels of
gold, which Xiao-Bai used to purchase a long-term lease on a house for her
family.
Unlike Hollywood stars or a few Beijing opera superstars at the time,
actors in Republican China were never rich, no matter how famous they
were. Xiao-Bai Yumei’s father, one of the most popular actors in all-male
Shengxian opera, earned sixty yuan monthly, which was enough to keep
a family of ﬁve comfortable. Xiao-Bai Yumei, however, earned in women’s
opera much more than her father did. Her income not only made her fam-
ily comfortable but also paid for her three brothers’ education. According
to Shaoxing Opera Daily, the highest monthly salary for Yue opera stars was
two hundred yuan in 1938 and six hundred yuan in 1940.
72 A reasonable
Patrons and Patronage    127

=== PDF PAGE 149 ===

extrapolation would indicate about four hundred yuan per month in 1939.
Compared to the earnings of factory workers and white-collar employees,
actors’ salaries may look high, but only a few famous Yue opera actresses
actually earned that much. Moreover, the money quickly disappeared—
to pay for costumes and daily expenditures for families living in the city
and relatives who remained in the countryside. There was always the ques-
tion of saving for the summer and winter off seasons, when actresses did
not earn salaries, as well as for the years after retirement, which usually
occurred when actresses were in their late twenties. Thus, for actresses, gifts
from adoptive mothers represented a source of income that contributed
signiﬁcantly to their personal ﬁnances.
Adoptive mothers helped Yue opera actresses not only ﬁnancially but
socially as well. The patronage Wei Shaochang and his parents bestowed
on Yao Shuijuan is a good example, illustrating how the rich and power-
ful Ning-Shao immigrants helped make successes of an actress and an opera.
When Yao Shuijuan made her debut in Shanghai in early 1938, a young
female fan introduced her to Wei Jinshan and his wife, who subsequently
took Yao as an adoptive daughter and deluged her with generous gifts, from
professional to personal items. Yao’s extravagant stage costumes and para-
phernalia, along with her performing skill, became a subject of public gos-
sip. It was said that she changed costumes eighteen times in one play. She
had, it was rumored, the most gorgeous brocade stage curtains with her
name embroidered on them; she was, in fact, the ﬁrst Yue opera actress to
use expensive logo curtains.
73 In 1939, with the backing of Wei Jinshan,
Yao Shuijuan obtained a lease on the Queen’s Great Theater and became
the ﬁrst Yue opera actress with her “own” theater, although it was actually
controlled by the Weis.
74
Wei Shaochang, then in high school, also became a fan of Yao Shuijuan’s.
He and two other Shaoxing natives published a couple of tabloid fan mag-
azines, The Song of Yue (Yue ou), and Shaoxing Opera News, to promote Yao
Shuijuan and Yue opera in general. Inspired by patron publications in honor
of famous Beijing opera female impersonators such as Mei Lanfang and Cheng
Yanqiu, Wei and his colleagues also published a special issue dedicated to
Yao and her art, the ﬁrst publication of the sort for a Yue opera actress.
75
These publications were ﬁlled with photos of Yao and articles and reports
that praised the actress and her art, portraying her as a modern conscien-
tious actress and her art as the best of its kind. The book also contains a line
of calligraphy by Mei Lanfang for Yao Shuijuan, which reads: “The queen
of Yue opera.” Mei had not yet met Yao, and he crafted the calligraphy for
128 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 150 ===

Wei Jinshan, who had requested it on Yao’s behalf. It was a smart idea that
helped lift the cultural-social status of Yao Shuijuan and Yue opera by equat-
ing Yao Shuijuan with Mei Lanfang, the “queen of Beijing opera.”
76
Patrons provided a social network, a sort of social protection, for
actresses faced with the theater owner’s monopoly of their trade. Actresses,
who were rural girls newly arrived in Shanghai, lacked experience and social
networks that might help them counter the power of the theater boss, who
tended to take advantage of his employees’ vulnerability. With powerful
patrons such as the Weis, however, Yao Shuijuan secured a long-term lease
on the Queen’s Great Theater, hence becoming somewhat self-employed.
Within a few years of her arrival, Yao Shuijuan became the most noted Yue
opera actress and a star in Shanghai’s public culture, or so it seemed. A
December 1940 survey by Drama Semi-monthly (Banyue xiju) indicates that
Yao Shuijuan’s shows had the highest viewing rate, with Xiao Dangui sec-
ond, and Ma Zhanghua third.
77 In fact, Xiao Dangui was at least as popu-
lar, as suggested by a saying of the time: “The three ﬂowers were surpassed
by the graceful; the graceful was surpassed by a laurel.” The three ﬂowers
were Shi Yinhua, Zhao Ruihua, and Tu Xinhua, the very ﬁrst generation
of women’s opera actresses; the “graceful” (juan) was Yao Shuijuan; and the
“laurel” ( gui) was Xiao Dangui. But Xiao Dangui and Ma Zhanghua were
not as lucky as Yao Shuijuan. Both died young and tragically, after each
tried to break free from her boss’s control. 
Even now, Wei Shaochang felt compelled to give credit to the adoption
practice by comparing the different situations of Yao Shuijuan and Xiao
Dangui: “Try to imagine,” Wei commented, “with a devil like Zhang Chun-
fan following Xiao, how could decent adoptive mothers and sisters dare to
get close to her? In contrast, Yao Shuijuan had the most powerful patrons
and was friendly with tabloid writers. The different situations of the two
stars could not but affect their careers and lives.”
78 Self-promotion notwith-
standing, Wei Shaochang’s story is not without merit. Actresses must have
found that the social and ﬁnancial support provided by adoptive parents
could be of some signiﬁcance. What is important is not that Zhang Chun-
fan was a devil but that he alone controlled Xiao’s life and career.
The adoptive parents system continued into the early PRC period. One
interesting example involves the actress Gao Jin, a promising actress in the
mid-1950s specializing in young male roles. Her family was quite poor,
and her brother was in the laundry business in Hong Kong. Gao wanted
to join her brother and could not obtain permission. But she knew a young
girl who admired her and her art and whose mother held a position of some
Patrons and Patronage    129

=== PDF PAGE 151 ===

responsibility at the local police station. The girl introduced Gao to her
mother, and the mother took Gao as her adoptive daughter and helped her
obtain permission to go to Hong Kong.
79
Patrons, of course, were not altruists. Some were suspected of being
involved in activities deemed indecent or deviant, such as suspicious adop-
tive father-daughter relationships or homosexual adoptive mother-daughter
relationships. An interesting commentary in Yue Opera Newshad this to say
about patrons and patronage:
Patrons all aim to satisfy their own desires. Their explicit purpose is to boost
the actresses’ popularity, but their implicit purpose is to appropriate the
actresses. What patrons do is merely ﬂatter the actresses, to win their favor.
The great patrons ﬂatter the great stars, and small patrons ﬂatter small stars.
To ﬂatter an actress, a patron has to give costumes and paraphernalia as
gifts, manage theaters, organize opera companies, publish special issues,
and everything else necessary to gratify the star. There are also some people
who join the claques as a favor to their friends. 
As for female patrons, they also have their purposes. Some want to be
respectable senior adoptive mothers, others want to ﬁnd concubines for their
husbands, still others are interested in homosexual relations with the
actresses. We ﬁnd no concrete evidence of homosexuality in Yue opera cir-
cles, but we know it certainly exists.
The formulae are as follows: male patrons (yang) ﬂatter young female char-
acters (yin), and yang plus yin equals neutrality. Female patrons (yin) ﬂatter
young male impersonators (yang—though fake yang, better than nothing). 
The author declared, “I think the most loyal patron is every ‘pure and clean’
audience member in every theater.” And he ended his comments with the
question: “Does the development of Yue opera rely on ﬂattery?”
80
The author was certainly critical, but actresses generally condoned the
practice of patronage and acknowledged that they beneﬁted from it. Xiao-
Bai Yumei as well as other actresses did not have many complaints about
adoptive mothers, even though the adoptive mother system has received
much criticism and negative portrayals in the ofﬁcial history and discourse
on Yue opera after 1949. During the Republican and early PRC period, all
popular stars had their loyal patrons, many of whom took the role of adop-
tive mother. A star usually had more than one adoptive mother and many
more special patrons. Xu Yulan, for example, had at least two adoptive moth-
ers, Zhao Naixue and the wife of Xu Datong, popularly known as “the king
130 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 152 ===

of paper manufacture.” Xiao-Bai had three adoptive mothers; one was the
wife of a comprador, and the other two were wives of Ning-Shao bankers.
When asked why women’s opera had such success in Shanghai, Xiao-Bai
Yumei responded with one sentence: “That’s because of the adoptive moth-
ers.”
81 Xiao-Bai might have had her personal success in mind with that
answer, but indeed the success of many top actresses like Xiao-Bai ensured
the success of women’s Yue opera as a whole.
Another type of patronage involved women professionals and emerg-
ing entrepreneurs in Republican Shanghai, who aided their favorite actresses
with their professional expertise and social experience. Zhao Naixue, an
excellent tailor and the adoptive mother of Xu Yulan, not only took care
of Xu’s life but moreover was responsible for many of Xu’s specially
designed stage costumes. Xu Yulan moved in with Zhao in 1946 and lived
with her for many years, until Xu got married in 1954. During Xu’s sick-
ness in 1946, Zhao acted as the actress’s parent, caring for her at her bed-
side and also defending her against her boss Zhang Chunfan’s demands
that she perform.
82 Xu’s own mother later came to Shanghai and lived with
her, but as a rural woman, her mother could not give her the kind of social
support that Zhao was able to provide.
Tang Diyin, owner of the Green Jade Pen Company, was a special patron
of Yuan Xuefen’s and supported many of the actress’s activities through her
business expertise, although Yuan was not exactly Tang’s adoptive daugh-
ter, and the two probably had a more equal relationship than most others.
Yuan met Tang at the Soviet Union Radio Station through Chen Shulian,
the radio announcer. Yuan agreed to advertise for Tang’s pens, not for money,
but because she supported hardworking independent woman like Tang.
83
According to Cheng Rong:
Tang Diyin’s success came from her hard work. Her parents discriminated
against girls and gave her no support. Tang was strong willed and managed
to become an apprentice in a stationery shop after graduating from primary
school. When I saw her in 1945, she wore very short hair and a straight
cheongsam. She had a lot of ideas, very experienced and with a strong con-
cept of women’s independence. All of us four sisters [Yuan, Tang, Chen, and
Cheng herself] were like that—we all wanted independence, not reliance
on men.
84
Tang’s was a small factory that employed about ten workers. It was set up
in two living rooms of a three-story townhouse on a lane that branched
Patrons and Patronage    131

=== PDF PAGE 153 ===

off the main roadway, a type of housing known as shikumen. Tang was not
really rich, and she supported Yuan with her expertise and connections rather
than ﬁnancially. During the Civil War period, between 1946 and 1949, Tang
acted as Yuan’s trusted representative, and Yuan relied on Tang during these
eventful and sometimes very difﬁcult days.
85
It should be noted that even though rich patrons adopted only popular
stars who specialized in young male and female roles, other actresses, with
little access to this institution, were not critical of it. Zhou Baokui, a well-
known actress specializing in elder female roles, remarked, “Only big stars
had adoptive mothers. Others did not have this beneﬁt. We had to spend
much of our monthly pay on buying stage costumes for ourselves.” She
may have been a little envious but certainly was not critical.
86
The adoptive mother system lingered into the early PRC period but
ended with the beginning of the Cultural Revolution in 1966. With the
revolution, a totally different sociology and political economy replaced
those of the 1930s and 1940s, which had encouraged the development of
upper-class women’s patronage of Yue opera.
Yue Opera in the Mass Media 
In Shanghai in the 1940s, Yue opera’s inﬂuence was not limited to opera-
goers. Modern means of mass communication, such as radio, the phono-
graph and audio recordings, and motion pictures, plus cheaply produced
lyric handbooks (see ﬁg. 3.1), made Yue opera a pervasive inﬂuence in urban
society and beyond in the early Chinese electronic age.
87 Shanghai’s res-
idents, men and women, old and young, even if they did not attend the
performances in person, were all exposed to Yue opera—constantly hear-
ing its lyrics and music played on radios and phonographs, reading its gos-
sip in the tabloid press, and seeing its images in theatrical posters, newspaper
advertisements, lyric handbooks, and photographs displayed in downtown
photo studios. Many lower-class women who could not afford to attend
performances by major troupes before 1949 and many white-collar men
who did not care to attend Yue opera were nevertheless familiar with it
through hearing gossip about its stars as well as through its famous plays,
lyrics, music, and character modeling. 
The relationship between the new high-technology media and popular
entertainment in mid-twentieth-century Shanghai was one of mutual
reliance, not much different from that of our day, in which high-tech media
depended on popular programming in order to develop, while popular forms
132 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 154 ===

used high-tech means to spread beyond the limits of traditional venues.
The most popular programming of the time included Suzhou story-
singing, Yue opera, Beijing opera, Shanghai opera, and comic shows, with
the story-singing and Yue opera being perhaps the most commercially viable.
The story of Yue opera reveals much about the formation of a mass-medi-
ated popular culture in modern Shanghai. 
Radio appeared in Shanghai in the 1920s and became popular during
the 1930s. Private ownership of radio sets was already prevalent in mid-
dle- and upper-class households, and women in these families were avid
listeners, since they spent the larger part of the day at home.
88 But the inﬂu -
ence of radio broadcasting went far beyond the ownership of radio sets.
For one thing, Republican Shanghai was already a very crowded place.
Most of Shanghai’s commoner population lived in shikumen , three-story
townhouses located on the narrow lanes that branched off the main
streets.
89 A radio playing in one household could easily be heard by a dozen
or so neighbors. Moreover, there were always some neighborhood shops
as well as department stores, restaurants, and teahouses playing radios to
attract potential customers off the streets. Movies made during the period
Patrons and Patronage    133
3.1  Cheaply produced Yue opera lyrics handbooks and popular promotional 
publications for Yue opera fans in the 1930s and 1940s. (Preserved at the 
Shanghai Municipal Library)

=== PDF PAGE 155 ===

often tried to create a lively atmosphere by playing radio shows, popular
songs, Suzhou story-singing, or Yue opera in the background. The Yue opera
fan Wu Ping remarked that when she was in primary school, she was always
distracted by Yue opera broadcasts forever playing in the department store
across the street from her classroom. “I was listening to the radio across
the street from my school all the time. I didn’t care that much about my
math. But I could tell which actress was on as soon as I heard the huqin play-
ing the opening scores, even before she started to sing.”
90
The ﬁrst Yue opera radio show went on the air in July 1939, performed
by Ma Zhanghua with Fu Quanxiang and later with Yuan Xuefen.91 Sanyou
Enterprises, a pharmaceutical company, sponsored the show in order to
advertise its products. Ma Zhanghua’s fame quickly spread via airwaves
throughout the city. She soon became known as “the lightning young male
impersonator” (shandian xiaosheng). The word shandian, “lightning,” connotes
speed while alluding to electronic devices, a perfect description of Ma’s
sudden success boosted by the radio program. Because she advertised a tonic
product for Sanyou Enterprises, Ma got another nickname, a more cynical
one perhaps, “the tonic young male impersonator” (buwan xiaosheng), vividly
illustrating how much her fame was associated with the radio advertising. 
Sanyou Enterprises, moreover, published a special issue accompanying
its radio program, Yue Opera Special Issue(Yueju zhuankan), which was printed
on cheap paper and distributed free of charge. The booklet of about three
hundred pages contains pictures of Ma Zhanghua, Yuan Xuefen, and other
popular actresses as well as the lyrics of popular pieces from Yue opera
plays, punctuated by advertisements for the company’s products. In one
typical example, Ma Zhanghua’s and Yuan Xuefen’s lyrics occupy the larger
part of the two facing pages. Below the lyrics is a clearly printed line: “From
6:00 to 7:10  P.M. during Ma Zhanghua’s and Yuan Xuefen’s Yue opera,
please call in and request your favorite pieces. Ma’s and Yuan’s women’s
Yue opera performs at the Dalai Theater in Hushe on Beijing Road; for
reservations call 92205.” And on the left side, an advertisement for Sanyou
tonics catches the eye.
92
In the ensuing decade, as with Xuesheng Company and the Soviet Union
Radio Station (discussed in chapter 2), major Yue opera companies used
radio to introduce new plays, enhance their public visibility, and promote
sales. Actresses made themselves available to listeners and answered their
questions during the ﬁxed daily programs, which usually ran one to two
hours.
93 Live broadcasts from the theater were another regular feature. Yue
opera companies contracted directly with radio stations for broadcasts; the
134 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 156 ===

two parties usually did not pay each other for these programs, but adver-
tising revenues went to the stations.
The phonograph played a similar role in enhancing Yue opera’s popu-
larity. A phonograph was a luxury item owned mostly by upper-class fam-
ilies; in movies made during the 1940s, the presence of a phonograph
indicated an upper-class lifestyle. The inﬂuence of phonographs and
records, however, extended beyond the upper-class living room through
a market network of phonograph and recording companies, radio stations,
theaters, bookstores, publishing houses, department stores, radio equip-
ment and repair stores, and even watchmakers’ shops. A contemporaneous
lyric pocketbook, Complete Book of Lyrics from Shaoxing Opera(Shaoxing xikao
quance), testiﬁes to a marketing network centered on Yue opera. The book
was published in 1939 and cost sixty cents, roughly the price of a ticket to
a Yue opera show. It contains seventy-nine pages of lyrics from various Yue
opera plays, about twenty pages of pictures of Yue opera stars, and many
pages of advertisements. This lyric pocketbook reveals an interconnected
world of entertainment, commerce, and the media. One page has a chart
listing radio stations along with station symbols, wave frequencies, phone
numbers, and addresses. The other side of the page is an advertisement for
a phonograph company. The ﬁrst page contains two coupons from a phono-
graph company, which the reader could use to request that the designated
radio station play two Yue opera pieces from the company’s records. The
next two pages list major Yue opera theaters, with phone numbers and
addresses, and display an advertisement for another phonograph company.
On the inner back cover is a list of distributors of the book, some of which
appear to be retailers of phonographs and records. The distributors in Shang-
hai include four Yue opera theaters, four phonograph companies, three radio
stations, a radio repair shop, and a bookstore. Distributors outside Shang-
hai include phonograph stores, watchmakers’ shops, radio equipment
shops, department stores, and various retail stores.
94
Compared to radio, the phonograph had its advantages—it could play
a recording over and over again, and it helped spread the inﬂuence of Yue
opera far beyond Shanghai’s radio boundaries. Qiu Wenguang, a Sheng-
xian native and a lifetime Yue opera fan who has lived in Taiwan since 1949,
recalled how young girls in Shengxian learned Yue opera by singing along
with phonograph and records: 
My most vivid memory goes back to 1943, when I ﬁnished the fourth grade
and returned home from my grandma’s place to go to Chongren Senior Pri-
Patrons and Patronage    135

=== PDF PAGE 157 ===

mary School. Almost all the twenty or more girls in the school were mem-
bers of an opera school. As soon as they joined the opera school, they sat
around a table, holding a piece of paper with lyrics in their hands, and sang
together loudly with great concentration....  
During these two years, I had a classmate by the name of Qiu Chutao.
Chutao’s family and mine were on the same street, less than one hundred
meters away from each other. We thus played together even after school.
His family owned a phonograph, and his older sister Xingyun and cousin
Aining (who was also called Yuxuan) often sang along with the records,
assisted by a palm-size lyric book. As I had heard them singing all the time
in these years, I had these lyrics down pat.
95
Yue opera actresses began to produce records as early as 1936, when Yuan
Xuefen made her ﬁrst recording for the French-owned Baidai Recording
Company.
96 After that, hundreds of recordings of numerous well-known
Yue opera actresses appeared in the marketplace. Printed lyrics and scripts,
used in conjunction with the phonograph and records, helped listeners
better understand and appreciate the opera and aided amateur artists in
improving their skills.
97
Shanghai’s press also played a role in creating a mass opera culture. Print-
ing shops could be set up in a downstairs living room, and cheap, recycled
paper could be used to produce low-cost handbooks, which could then be
sold at bargain prices for a few cents to maybe sixty cents each.
98 Most of
these publications were printed in a small, thin format so that they could
easily be carried around in a pocket or a woman’s purse. They were mass-
produced to feed a large urban public interested in the opera. Fans collected
these pocketbook lyrics, and amateurs used them as scripts when putting
together shows for themselves. 
Other publications included tabloids, Yue opera company promotional
issues, and fan magazines. During the New Yue Opera reforms, companies
began to put together playbills that were sold at theater entrances before
each performance. The playbill included introductions to the plot and cast,
information on new features in stage scenery and costumes, and inciden-
tal details about the stars and the production process. These playbills sold
so well that they generated a considerable side income for the editors, usu-
ally company staff members.
99 Yue opera fan Wu Ping loved the playbills
so much that she saved all the ones she bought at performances and care-
fully preserved them in a wicker suitcase along with many lyric scripts.
100
These publications connected a visual and audio world to a printed world,
136 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 158 ===

blurred the territorial boundaries of different regimes of mass communi-
cation, and helped diffuse the culture of Yue opera in Shanghai’s public
space.
Finally, it was the cinema that made Yue opera one of the most inﬂuen-
tial arts in the nation. Motion pictures acquired a mass audience in Shang-
hai during the Republican period. As a 1936 essay, “The Development of
Shanghai’s Cinemas,” noted:
Motion pictures...  a s  a  n e w  f o r m  o f  a r t  i n d e e d  won lots of people’s inter-
est and appreciation. The movie business developed rapidly. As time passes,
it not only comes to share the entertainment market with China’s traditional
operas but tends to surpass them in popularity. Right now there are between
thirty-three and thirty-six cinemas in Shanghai. Last year a movie revue,
Diantong Pictorial [Diantong huabao], charted all the cinemas on a Shanghai
street map and topped the map with a large-character headline, “Places Where
a Million People Spend Leisure Time Everyday!”
101
A decade later, a tourist book published in 1947 listed thirty-four movie
theaters, while the Shanghai Gazetteer(Shanghai zhi) listed forty “noted” cin-
emas in Shanghai.102 “A million people” is certainly a gross exaggeration,
and statistics indicate that the cinema shared the entertainment market with
other popular forms. Unlike local operas, however, the cinema drew a gen-
eral audience from the city’s young professionals and ofﬁce workers as well
as students, an audience that cut across native origins yet was character-
ized by its youth and modern-style education. 
During the postwar period, Yue opera actresses began to look at the cin-
ema as a means to expand the horizon of their art and reach out to the gen-
eral public. The ﬁrst to act in ﬁlms was Yuan Xuefen, and the ﬁrst Yue opera
ﬁlm was Sister Xianglin, produced in 1948 by the Qiming Studio. In the same
year, this studio also produced the noted dramatist Hong Shen’s Hope for
the Day at the Dawn When the Cock Begins to Crow(Jiming zao kantian), directed
by Ying Yunwei and starring Yuan Xuefen among others. Sister Xianglin
opened in September 1948 in four downtown cinemas, and copies of the
ﬁlm were distributed outside of Shanghai. The September program at the
Great Shanghai Theater (Da Shanghai Daxiyuan) featured the ﬁlm Sister
Xianglin in the afternoon and the Yue opera Coral (Shanhu yin), scripted by
the famous playwright Tian Han, in the evening. Both were productions
of Yuan Xuefen’s Xuesheng Company.
103 Another example shows how cin-
ema helped promote reformed Yue opera outside of Shanghai, even export-
Patrons and Patronage    137

=== PDF PAGE 159 ===

ing it back to its native province of Zhejiang. In early 1949, Xiao Yueying,
a leading Yue opera actress with a rural itinerant troupe in the Hangzhou-
Jiaxing-Huzhou area, watched the ﬁlm. Xiao was so impressed that she
decided to adapt the ﬁlm for the stage. Working solely from memory, she
and her troupe put together the play and performed it successfully for her
rural audience.
104 The most inﬂuential Yue opera ﬁlms, however, were made
in the 1950s and early 1960s and include The Butterﬂy Lovers (1953), Emerald
Hairpin(1962), andDream of the Red Chamber(1962) plus Sister Xianglin (1978).105
These Yue opera movies were popular and attracted a nationwide, cross-gen-
der audience; many of these people never attended Yue opera shows. 
Women’s Yue opera permeated the mass media and, through them, pen-
etrated modern China’s cultural consciousness. Radio, the phonograph,
the printing press, and ﬁlm together transformed an urban women’s culture—
Yue opera and its love dramas—into a media phenomenon with a lasting
inﬂuence on modern China’s cultural formation in the mid-twentieth
 century.
106
138 Patrons and Patronage

=== PDF PAGE 160 ===

139
Chapter 4
Staging in the Public Arena
One evening in May 1946, the atmosphere in the Star Theater was unusual,
as a special rehearsal of the New Yue Opera play Sister Xianglin was about
to begin. The play had been adapted from the great modernist and left-
wing writer Lu Xun’s 1924 short story “The New Year’s Sacriﬁce” (Zhufu).
Well-known intellectuals and dramatists occupied almost the whole bal-
cony, among them Tian Han, Hong Shen, Huang Zuolin, Shi Dongshan,
Fei Mu, Zhang Junxiang, Li Jianwu, Bai Yang, Ding Cong, and Hu Feng.
For the ﬁrst time in its history, Yue opera had the honor of entertaining
the cultural elite as a group.
1
Sister Xianglin tells a tragic story of an unfortunate peasant woman who
has married twice and been widowed twice. Both of her husbands died in
sickness and poverty, and wolves consumed her only son, Ah Mao. Local
superstitions have convinced her that she is to blame for her loved ones’
misfortunes, because of bad karma from her previous lives. At the house-
hold of Master Lu, where she works as a domestic helper, a fellow servant
tells her that the king of the underworld will cut her into two halves after
her death so that she may serve her two husbands in the other world. Vil-
lagers scorn her for bringing bad luck to whatever she touches, and Mas-
ter Lu eventually dismisses her for this reason. Wandering in the streets
with a beggar’s stick and basket in her hand, she asks passersby: “Tell me,
will the soul continue to live after a person dies? Does hell exist?” No one
seems able to answer her question, and people try to avoid her. Rejected
by all, having no place to go, cold and hungry, she perishes in the streets
one New Year’s eve. 
Lu Xun’s work had rarely been adapted for the stage, due both to its


=== PDF PAGE 161 ===

political sensitivity and to the difﬁculties of translating his artistry—its
nuance and rich meaning—into performance. This was the ﬁrst time since
the mid-1930s that a story by Lu Xun was performed onstage, an extraor-
dinary time when his work had become even more politically sensitive than
before in the eve of an all-out civil war between the Nationalist Party and
the Chinese Communist Party. It would have been impossible for left-wing
intellectuals to produce Lu Xun’s work on a Shanghai stage under the Nation-
alist government’s watchful eye. The leading cultural personalities were sur-
prised that Yue opera—a local opera largely by and for women, featuring
“conventional” love stories, and of little political signiﬁcance—was doing
what they could not do. The intellectuals had come to watch the play after
being invited by Xu Guangping, Lu Xun’s widow, and out of respect for
the master. Hardly expecting that a “vulgar” local opera would be able to
do justice to Lu Xun’s work, they were nonetheless impressed by the show.
Tian Han, for example, profusely praised the performance: “This is from
real life, humane, accurate, and convincing.”
2
The play also caught the attention of the Nationalist government and
eventually made Yue opera a site of contention between the two political
rivals during the ensuing civil war, from 1946 to 1949. Out of this conﬂict,
an unlikely alliance emerged between Yue opera actresses and CCP left-
wing intellectuals: intellectuals, with their pens and networks, helped cre-
ate positive modern images of Yue opera actresses in the city’s mainstream
media and began to penetrate Yue opera companies, through which they
were able to inﬂuence a large population characterized by relatively low
literacy, political apathy, and indifference to intellectual discourse.
The staging of Sister Xianglin in May 1946 set in motion a chain of land-
mark events in the ensuing years that culminated in the media drama in
the wake of Xiao Dangui’s tragic death. Unwittingly involved in the poli-
tics of the Civil War, the actresses fought their own battles and emerged
during this conﬂict-ridden period with a newfound identity and status. 
Politics and Culture in Postwar Shanghai
The post–World War II period in China witnessed another round of com-
petition between the two rival parties on all fronts. While the two sides
engaged each other ferociously on the battleﬁeld, they also fought an ide-
ological war on the urban front, competing to control or inﬂuence public
opinion. On August 31, 1945, two weeks after Japan surrendered, the
Nationalist Executive Committee issued guidelines for regulating the mass
140 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 162 ===

media. In September, the Nationalists ordered the conﬁscation of all news-
 papers, news agencies, magazines, and movie studios owned by Japanese
and puppet-government institutions or related individuals. From Septem-
ber 17 to 22, the government reorganized the two major privately owned
Shanghai newspapers, Shanghai Newspaper (Shen bao) and Daily News (Xin-
wen bao), taking control of their editorial boards.
3 On April 2, 1946, the
Shanghai municipal police issued a directive, “Censorship of Shanghai’s
Broadcast Programs (Draft),” ordering that “all radio stations in the city,
privately or publicly owned, should submit their broadcast programs to
this bureau for review two days in advance.”
4 Also in 1946, the Social Affairs
Bureau of the Shanghai municipal government ordered all theaters and opera
houses to register with its ofﬁce as a prerequisite for licensing. It then ordered
all actors, singers, dancing girls, and prostitutes to register, a policy deemed
humiliating by all actors and threatening by left-wing intellectual actors
active in ﬁlm and spoken drama. The government also took steps to orga-
nize Nationalist-controlled unions in the entertainment business as well as
in factories. At the same time, secret police relentlessly cracked down on
CCP activities, arresting and executing the Party’s underground workers. 
These government measures were, however, far from effective in check-
ing CCP activities. The Party reestablished its Shanghai Committee after
the Japanese surrender, led ﬁrst by Liu Changsheng and then by Liu Xiao
after he arrived in Shanghai from Yan’an in February 1946. In January 1947,
the CCP Central Committee established its Shanghai Branch, which in May
became the Shanghai Bureau, headed by Secretary Liu Xiao and Deputy
Secretary Liu Changsheng. The Shanghai Bureau contained subcommit-
tees charged with responsibility for Party activities related to factories, busi-
nesses, schools, women, and culture. The Committee on the Cultural and
Commercial United Front was then established under Secretary Zhang
Zhiyi and Deputy Secretary Sha Wenhan to lead and coordinate under-
ground activities in the ﬁelds of publishing, literature, theater, and music;
at the end of 1948, it became the Committee on Cultural Work, with Chen
Yusun as its secretary.
5
Under the leadership of the Shanghai Bureau and its subcommittees,
numerous grassroots cells were established in all walks of life, directly imple-
menting the Party agenda in the local environment. Systematic party build-
ing aside, CCP cadres founded, penetrated, and controlled many civil
organizations, such as teachers’ associations, student unions, associations for
ﬁlm industry artists, and women’s organizations, using them as legal ven-
ues for subversive activities against the government. The CCP’s cultural activ-
Staging in the Public Arena    141

=== PDF PAGE 163 ===

ities incorporated a wide variety of artistic forms, including the popular sing-
along movement, cartoon satire, and grassroots amateur performance.
The mass media—the press and the ﬁlm industry—remained the prior-
ity of the Party’s cultural work. As early as September 14, 1945, Mao Zedong
and Zhou Enlai, in the middle of peace negotiations in Chongqing, sent a
telegram to the CCP Central Committee in Yan’an and top leaders in the
central China base area with the following instructions: “The Shanghai New
China Daily[Xinhua ribao] and other Party-controlled newspapers published
under the aegis of non-Party associates should be published in Nanjing,
Wuhan, and Hong Kong as soon as possible. According to Nationalist reg-
ulations, newspapers can be published ﬁrst and register later. Act quickly—
the quicker, the better. Or we will get the worst of it.”
6 From August 1945
to June 1946, before the outbreak of civil war, a large number of left-wing
publications appeared. In Shanghai, CCP members published more than
a dozen newspapers and periodicals, including Times Daily (Shidai ribao),
Weekly (Zhou bao), People’s Weekly (Renren zhoubao), United Daily (Lianhe
ribao), Free Man (Ziyou ren), The Renaissance (Wenyi fuxing),Literary Gallery
(Wencui), and National Reconstruction Daily (Jian’guo ribao). The Southern
Committee of the CCP’s Central Committee, for example, secretly spon-
sored United Daily, although the registered publisher was an American. The
government shut down the newspaper on November 30, 1945, but the same
staff managed to publish United Evening News(Lianhe wanbao) on April 15,
1946, secretly sponsored by the CCP’s Shanghai Committee, only to have
the paper banned again on May 24, 1947 . In mid-1947, the government
forcefully asserted control over the left-wing press as the military conﬂict
between the two parties escalated and began to turn in the CCP’s favor;
by the end of the year, critical left-wing periodicals had virtually disap-
peared from the public domain.
7
Left-wing intellectuals, however, also inﬁltrated the editorial boards of
privately owned mainstream newspapers, the most famous of which were
Wenhui Daily (Wenhui bao) and Dagong Daily; the editors in chief of both
papers were CCP members.
8 CCP members and left-wing intellectuals more-
over worked as editors, reporters, and columnists for major newspapers while
contributing to government-controlled media such as The Central Daily
(Zhongyang ribao), Shanghai Newspaper, and Daily News. 
The CCP’s presence in the print media was a highly motivated, organ-
ized, disciplined, and effective force consisting of capable young men and
women. These journalists skillfully provided media support for student
demonstrations and popular unrest and inﬂuenced public opinion through
142 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 164 ===

criticism of unpopular government policies. To a certain extent, CCP under-
ground journalism was able to coordinate what in normal times would be
routine scrutiny of the government into an opposition front and reoriented
public sensibilities to the CCP’s advantage.
Likewise, the CCP and left-wing intellectuals, who had held irrefutable
prestige in Shanghai’s ﬁlm industry in the 1930s, quickly regained their
inﬂuence in the postwar period. In 1946, Yang Hansheng and other CCP
cultural cadres returned to Shanghai and reestablished the Lianhua Studio,
which was reorganized into the Kunlun Studio in 1947 . This studio pro-
duced many popular movies such as Eight Thousand Miles under Clouds and Moon-
light (Baqian li lu yun he yue), in 1947); River of Sorrow Flows East (Yijiang
chunshui xiang dong liu), in 1947; and Lights from the Windows of Thousands
of Families (Wanjia denghuo), in 1948. Between 1946 and 1949, by the CCP’s
account, two dozen “progressive” and inﬂuential features appeared in
Shanghai.
The Party was, however, slow in penetrating the world of popular enter-
tainment in the city, as left-wing intellectuals who despised the commer-
cial popular culture were in charge of CCP cultural operations. During the
entire Civil War period, no CCP cell was set up in any popular entertain-
ment form in Shanghai. Despite their low priority, entertainment forms
were not free of CCP inﬂuence, and the staging of Sister Xianglin was partly
a result of wide-ranging CCP underground grassroots activities.
Sister Xianglin and the CCP’s Underground Operation
One day in April 1946, backstage at the Star Theater, Yuan Xuefen, the
leading actress and head of the company, was putting on makeup while
director and playwright Nan Wei read a story aloud to her. Nan Wei had
recently read “Sister Xianglin—A Study of Female Characters in Lu Xun’s
Work,” an essay in Women and Literature (Funü yu wenxue), by Ding Ying.
The essay had introduced Nan Wei to Lu Xun’s The New Year’s Sacriﬁce and
inspired him to adapt the story for the Yue opera stage. Yuan found her-
self becoming totally absorbed in the vivid scenery and characters of Shao -
xing, which was so familiar to her, and as soon as Nan Wei had ﬁnished,
she announced: “You write the play. I will perform it.”
9 In little more than
a month, the play Sister Xianglin was born.
Who was Ding Ying? Where did Nan Wei get the book? “Ding Ying”
was one of the many pseudonyms Ding Jingtang used in the 1940s in order
to protect his true identity. The following account is based on an inter-
Staging in the Public Arena    143

=== PDF PAGE 165 ===

view (see ﬁg. 4.1), his essays, and his book Women and Literature.10 Ding Jing-
tang lost his parents when he was young. He left his hometown of Ningbo
and moved to Shanghai to live with his aunt, who was married to, in Ding’s
words, a “medium-size capitalist.” During his years at the Young Men’s
Christian Association (YMCA) high school, from 1936 to 1939, Ding and
his fellow students worked with the Student Union (Xue Xie), a CCP-
afﬁliated local association coordinating citywide student mobilization for
the War of Resistance against Japan. Their duties included circulating the
organization’s journal Student Life (Xuesheng shenghuo), organizing study
groups, and coordinating student activities in several middle schools along
what is now Beijing Road. Ding joined the Party in 1938. “Comrades of
our generation who joined the revolution during the War of Resistance
almost all experienced a similar passage,” Ding explained, “from reading
the May Fourth New Literature, advancing to elementary Marxist read-
ings and training in organizational activities, to joining the Party.”
11 In 1939,
Ding qualiﬁed to enter Dongwu University. In winter 1940, he became
editor of The United Voice (Lian sheng), ofﬁcially sponsored by the Asso-
ciation of Shanghai Christian Student Fellowships but actually under the
direction of the CCP Committee on Student Activities. This and all other
similar publications came to a full stop in December 1941, when Japanese
troops marched into “island” Shanghai upon the outbreak of the Paciﬁc
War. Owing to the extremely dangerous situation in the occupied city, the
CCP Shanghai Committee was disbanded, and in order to maintain some
underground forces in the city, Ding and his comrades were instructed to
lie low.
12
As soon as the war ended, in August 1945, Ding Jingtang resumed his
work of publishing journals propagating left-wing ideas. Within this con-
text, he wrote and published his study on Sister Xianglin. Ding recalled in
1982:
After the victory [over Japan], a former college classmate of mine asked
me to contribute and organize articles for the journal Progressive Women(Qian-
jin funü) on behalf of the owners, Liu and his wife. 13 At that time, all the
journals I was coordinating were student publications that lacked stable
 funding. These journals often appeared for a few months and disappeared
whenever the funding ran out. Now, with this opportunity, I invited Tian
Zhongluo (Yuan Ying), Zhou Jiling, Zhao Zi, and others to occupy this posi-
tion. After the victory in the War of Resistance, I had planned to write a
series of articles on female images in modern Chinese literature. At the time,
144 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 166 ===

I wrote two pieces. The ﬁrst one was that very article, “Sister Xianglin—A
Study of Female Characters in Lu Xun’s Work,” published in the second issue
of Progressive Women [November 1945] under the pen name Li Yang. I had
written it in October 1945. The article was later republished in a collection
of essays titled Women and Literature, published under the name “Ding Ying”
in February 1946 by the Shanghai Hujiang Book House.
14
The Nationalist government shut down Progressive Women after four issues,
when a member of the Nationalist Shanghai Committee accused the jour-
nal of printing CCP propaganda, and the Shanghai Hujiang Book House
existed only as a name Ding had made up for the publication of his book.
Women and Literature, not sold in bookstores owing to censorship of left-
wing publications, circulated among friends and the like minded. Through
a network of comrades, friends, and relatives, the book reached Nan Wei,
Staging in the Public Arena    145
4.1  Ding Jingtang (right) and the author at Mr. Ding’s residence, February 9, 1996.
Ding and his CCP underground network facilitated the staging of Sister Xianglin
(Xianglin sao) in 1946 by Yuan Xuefen and her staff. (Photo: Ding Yanzhao)

=== PDF PAGE 167 ===

and an accidental meeting between two high-school friends triggered the
landmark production of the Yue opera Sister Xianglin.15
Ding Jingtang had a friend and comrade named Wu Kang. The two were
classmates and fellow activists at the YMCA high school, and Ding brought
Wu Kang into the Party in 1939. Wu qualiﬁed for entrance to Shanghai
Zhijiang University, while Ding entered Dongwu University, and they both
received YMCA fellowships for poor students. With his aunt’s under-
standing, Ding offered his fellowship to Wu Kang; Wu was from a poorer
family, one fellowship was not enough to support him through school, and,
because he spent most of his spare time working for the Party, he was not
able to work for money. Although classrooms for both Dongwu and Zhi-
jiang Universities were in the same building of the Continental department
store on Nanjing Road, the two friends nevertheless stopped seeing each
other, following Party regulations on underground work. One day in 1946,
Ding ran into Wu in the street. Told that Wu’s brother-in-law Nan Wei
worked for the Xuesheng Company, Ding handed Wu a copy of Women
and Literature and asked Wu to give it to Nan Wei.
16 Hoping to draw his
brother-in-law close to the revolution, Wu in turn asked Ding to send some
friends to contact Nan. Ding recalled:
At that time, I had already been transferred to work under the Shanghai [CCP]
Cultural Committee [Shanghai Wenwei] and was in charge of the Party-led
Shanghai Youth Association of Performing Arts. Many young Party mem-
bers were engaged in various theatrical activities. So I sent Liao Lin to Nan
Wei, with the introduction “Brother Ah Kang [reference to Wu Kang] asked
me to come to see you.” Liao Lin [pen names Luo Lin and Ye Ping] was an
amateur spoken-drama veteran and a special correspondent in ﬁlm and the-
ater for the daily newspaper The New Current Affairs [Shishi xinbao].
17
Liao Lin thereafter became a frequent visitor to the Xuesheng Company.
Liao’s girlfriend Tong Lijuan, also a Party member, was working with the
Shanghai Women’s Association, an organization headed by Lu Xun’s widow
Xu Guangping but in fact under CCP direction. In Xu’s name, Tong Lijuan
and another female CCP member acted as editors of the two daily news-
paper supplements on women’s issues, Women’s News(Fuxun), for United Evening
News, and Women’s Life (Funü shenghuo), for The New Current Affairs. While
Liao Lin made friends with Nan Wei, Tong Lijuan befriended Yuan Xuefen.
The two young CCP cadres encouraged Nan and Yuan in their efforts to
stage Lu Xun’s work. Liao Lin told Nan Wei, “Putting Lu Xun’s work on the
146 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 168 ===

stage will be a high point in your life.” Tong Lijuan arranged for Yuan Xue-
fen and Nan Wei to meet with Xu Guangping, who gave the Xuesheng Com-
pany permission to adapt The New Year’s Sacriﬁce for the Yue opera stage and
also provided moral support. After the performance, Liao and Tong took
Yuan Xuefen and Nan Wei to the home of Yu Ling, the playwright and head
of the CCP underground Committee on Culture, where they met Tian Han
and engaged in a serious discussion of local-opera reform.
18 Thus, although
the production of Sister Xianglinwas an autonomous decision made entirely
by Yuan and her director, lower-level CCP cadres served as catalysts and
guided Yuan and Nan to contact with top CCP intellectuals. 
The staging of Sister Xianglin made Yue opera and its reforms a subject of
discussion in the mainstream media. Left-wing journalists and commenta-
tors loudly applauded the play as a milestone in Yue opera reform and a turn-
ing point that marked the transformation of a “vulgar” local opera into a
reputable and meaningful theater for social and cultural reform. These com-
ments appeared not only in left-wing newspapers, such as Wenhui Dailyand
The New Citizen Daily (Xinmin ribao), but also in the Nationalist-controlled
The Daily Newsand The New Current Affairs. Liao Lin, using the pen name Luo
Lin, reported in The New Current Affairsa week before the opening of the play
in an article headlined “Lu Xun’s Famous Fiction Adapted for the Yue Opera
Stage: Yuan Xuefen Plays Sister Xianglin, Setting a New Record in Traditional
Opera Reform.”
19 Three days after the play’s premiere, Liao’s article, titled
“Tian Han Discusses Yue Opera Reform with Yuan Xuefen and Nan Wei,”
again helped draw Yue opera into mainstream culture.
20 In another article,
using the pen name Ye Ping, Liao Lin wrote: 
The staging of Sister Xianglin is signiﬁcant. No one can deny the fact that
local opera is groping forward step by step....  W e  h o p e  the staging of  Sister
Xianglin will inﬂuence various local operas and make them bear more respon-
sibilities for the education of their audience.21
Wenhui Dailyalso published an interview with Yuan Xuefen by Mei Duo, a left-
wing journalist. The article, titled “Sister Xianglin Backstage,” cites Yuan: 
She [Yuan Xuefen] said that their Xuesheng Company has more than twenty
members who have worked together for many years. The purpose for their
getting together is not just to make some money but rather to reform Yue
opera and make it progressive....  S h e  s a i d  t h a t  b e c ause Yue opera (Shao -
xing opera) traditionally presented stereotyped scholar-beauty love stories,
Staging in the Public Arena    147

=== PDF PAGE 169 ===

people naturally thought the opera worthless, but they can make the opera
socially meaningful by changing the content of the plays.22
A commentary by Yu Ping in World Morning News (Shijie chenbao) reads: 
The conversion of Sister Xianglinfor dramatic presentation opens a new path
for Yue opera and gives the opera a new life....  G e n e r ally speaking, the
conversion did not betray the spirit of Master Lu Xun’s original work.
Although the play emphasized a romance, it successfully manifested, through
the romance, the suffering and misfortune of ordinary rural women in feu-
dal society.
23
Another commentary, by Yu Yu in Daily News, praised Yue opera reforms
compared to the vulgarity of popular entertainment: 
While Beijing opera still ponders whether or not to reform, and when its
“imperial capital style” [Jingchao pai] relies on Break Open the Cofﬁn [Da piguan]
and Spinning Cotton [Fang mianhua] [deemed representative of vulgar erotic
plays], while the “vicious Shanghai style” [exing Haipai] relies on “striptease”
to survive, the “diduopera” [Yue opera] that they viewed with contempt walks
onto the great path of enlightenment one step at a time.
24
The inﬂuential playwright Tian Han, in his article “The Path toward
 Popularization of Performing Arts,” summarized the left-wing intellectual
elite’s view of Yue opera reforms and the staging of Sister Xianglin: 
Sister Xianglin moved me. I had occasionally seen didu opera, the so-called
Shaoxing civil opera, in places like the Great World [entertainment hall]
before the war. It did not catch my attention. Later, when I was in Chongqing
[during the war], I heard friends returning from “island” Shanghai praising
profusely the progressiveness of Shaoxing opera, saying that the opera had
developed to the extent that it could stage many socially meaningful plays
and that it now had its own opera houses ....  S till, I did not hope for too
much. Not until I attended the play Sister Xianglin was I convinced that the
opera’s achievement, due to its eight-year reform effort, has surpassed my
imagination.
25
Sister Xianglinmoreover caught the attention of the top CCP leadership and
ultimately inspired the Party to amend its underground cultural policy in
148 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 170 ===

Shanghai. In October 1946, Zhou Enlai, then leading the CCP team in
peace talks at Nanjing and spending a lot of time in Shanghai between meet-
ings, quietly attended the Xuesheng Company’s show Sad Moon over the Liao
Royal Palace, performed by Yuan Xuefen. Zhou’s family was originally from
Shaoxing, and Zhou himself had been fond of performing onstage in his
student years in Naikai High School in Tianjin. Impressed by Yuan Xue-
fen’s performance and the size of the audience, Zhou summoned Yu Ling
for an oral report on women’s Yue opera and its reforms. Before he left for
Yan’an, when the peace talks broke down in November 1946, Zhou twice
discussed local operas with the Shanghai underground. He told Yu Ling and
Liu Housheng, a CCP cadre and dramatist who later joined the Xuesheng
Company as head of the staff, “You should pay attention to this [Xuesheng]
company. I knew about Shaoxing opera, but I did not know that the opera
had such a large audience and was so inﬂuential in Shanghai.” He instructed,
“You should send Party members to help them improve their arts and, through
contacting them, respecting them, assisting them, patiently guide them
toward the road of revolution. They have an audience, and that is power.”
26
Recognizing the popularity and hence importance of local operas in
general, Zhou wanted them incorporated into the blueprint of the CCP’s
cultural work, instructing that Shanghai’s underground work in the enter-
tainment business should have a three-tier structure. The ﬁrst tier consisted
of overtly leftist spoken drama, which was entirely under Party control.
The second tier was the Kunlun Studio and the Audience Drama Com-
pany, both in the hands of left-wing intellectuals but featuring more pop-
ular productions. And the third tier included local operas and privately
owned movie studios, which indeed constituted the core of popular
entertainment. If the government were to crack down on leftist spoken
drama, as was almost certain to happen, then its personnel should move
to the second tier and from there to the third tier. Zhou stressed that the
Party ought to take local operas seriously because they had a consider-
able audience, but he cautioned the Shanghai underground to select upright
and respectable cadres to work in local operas.
27
Following Zhou’s instructions, the Shanghai underground committee sent
intellectual CCP members and afﬁliates to work with local opera troupes.
Party member Qian Yingyu and Party afﬁliate Wu Chen joined Yue opera
companies in 1947 . Later, in 1948, Liu Housheng himself entered the Xue -
sheng Company as a director who also headed the staff. By 1949, almost
all the ﬁve major Yue opera companies had one or two playwrights or direc-
tors who were CCP afﬁliates. Most of these men were veterans of spoken
Staging in the Public Arena    149

=== PDF PAGE 171 ===

drama. As the spoken-drama market continued to shrink during the post-
war period, and because the ﬁlm industry could absorb only a limited num-
ber of new participants, some veterans found employment in local opera,
calling this “jumping into the sea [of popular culture]” (xia hai). While spo-
ken-drama veterans worked for Yue opera companies, left-wing journalists
continued to support Yue opera reform and publicize new images of Yue
opera actresses in the print media, gathering public opinion behind the
actresses in a series of conﬂicts that followed the staging of Sister Xianglin.
Moreover, cultural celebrities such as Tian Han and Yu Ling became friends
and teachers of these young Yue opera reformers, providing much needed
advice and moral support. Tian Han and his wife An E also began to write
plays for Yue opera. The politically naive Yuan Xuefen and her colleagues
at the time did not know that these respected “good-hearted masters” (hao-
hao xiansheng) were associated with the CCP. In 1949, as the communist
army approached Shanghai, Liu Housheng and Wu Chen called a few meet-
ings with Yue opera actresses to discuss preparation for the imminent
takeover. In May, when the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) had overcome
the last Nationalist resistance in Shanghai, actresses from ﬁve major Yue
opera companies went on the air to welcome the PLA, telling Shanghai’s
populace to stay home and remain calm, as the PLA would not disturb the
common people.
28 On June 5, after the CCP took over Shanghai, the Party
convened a conference of the city’s cultural elites. Major Chen Yi addressed
the conference. The new government selected only two representatives from
the ﬁeld of popular entertainment: one was the famous Beijing opera actor
Zhou Xinfang, and the other was Yuan Xuefen.
The Union Incident: Actresses in Local and National Politics
The staging of Sister Xianglinin 1946 also caught the attention of the Nation-
alist Shanghai government and made Yuan Xuefen and her colleagues tar-
gets of political surveillance. The incident that occurred in the wake of
the show reveals how the national struggle between the CCP and the
Nationalists affected local politics within the Yue opera trade in postwar
Shanghai.
In July 1946, a group of Yue opera musicians, who were old masters of
the actor-centered system, and backstage hands, mostly men with unsta-
ble employment or unemployed, organized the Yue Opera Workers’ Union
in the context of the government-sponsored union movement—a means
of preempting the CCP’s labor movement but otherwise having no obvious
150 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 172 ===

focus and hence badly organized. Although the Yue opera union was ofﬁ-
cially afﬁliated with the Shanghai General Union under the Social Affairs
Bureau of the Shanghai municipal government, in reality it received little
leadership or discipline from any of these entities. The union activists, the
majority of whom were lower-class folks with little understanding of and
no access to national politics, cared only for their own concrete interests.
The union’s purposes, its organizers declared, were to offset the power of
theater bosses who had organized themselves into the Yue Opera Employ-
ers’ Union, safeguard members’ right to work, negotiate salaries on behalf
of its members, and maintain its members’ welfare. The union was instantly
popular among most Yue opera employees because it promised to ﬁght
employers on behalf of union members. Actresses and staff in most Yue
opera companies joined the union, and the unionists invited Yuan Xuefen
to chair the board of directors. Suspicious that this might be just another
way to squeeze money out of the actresses, Yuan declined to have any-
thing to do with it. But other popular actresses, including Fu Quanxiang
and Yin Guifang, were initially enthusiastic about the union and its ideas.
Fu Quanxiang offered her home to serve as headquarters for the union, and
Yin Guifang chaired the board with Fu Quanxiang, Zhu Shuizhao, Xu Yue -
xing (staff member), and Zhang Zifan (director) serving as board members.
Unfortunately, Yuan Xuefen’s suspicion was not without foundation. Before
long, the union fell into the hands of some unscrupulous Shengxian-native
men whose only concern was to collect money from actresses. They
harassed companies with random demands for “membership fees,” and the
union’s promise that it would protect the rights of employees turned out to
be empty. The union quickly lost its popularity as people realized that it
was nothing more than a charity for the unemployed former actors and a
“rice bowl” for some local opportunists, as Fu Quanxiang put it.
29 Moreover,
as money ﬂowed into the pockets of the opportunists, the union’s ﬁnancial
resources dried up, and the board members, most of whom were popular
stars, ended up paying the union’s bills out of their own pockets. Yin Guifang
resigned on August 25, and other board members followed suit.
30
The extortion of contributions from female stars by male associates—
whether local troublemakers, retired actors, theater bosses, or members of
male-dominated native-place organizations—was a common phenomenon
of the time, according to Fu Quanxiang and other actresses. Female stars
and their male associates were all part of a complicated native-place and
professional network that obligated young actresses to contribute to the
men’s welfare on the basis of native-place ties and former teacher-disciple
Staging in the Public Arena    151

=== PDF PAGE 173 ===

relationships. This moral pressure was often backed by the threat of van-
dalism or personal attack. No one liked to be squeezed, but actresses took
different approaches to the situation. They usually had to accede to at least
some requests—sometimes giving cash contributions and at other times
performing for private parties or fund-raising events.
31 While Yin Guifang
and Fu Quanxiang seem to have represented the attitude of many actresses
in their willingness to negotiate and cooperate with the unionists, Yuan
Xuefen refused to deal with them at all. Xiao Dangui and her Dangui Com-
pany, another major Yue opera company of the time, had nothing to do
with the unionists, because Xiao and the company were ﬁrmly in the hands
of Zhang Chunfan, a strongman in charge of the Employers’ Union. 
The unionists were angry. Not being in a position to harm Zhang, they
blamed Yuan Xuefen for leading the rebellion against the union and plot-
ted retaliation. On August 27, 1946, as Yuan rode in her personal rickshaw
to the Soviet Union Radio Station for a regular broadcast program, a man
ambushed her by pouring a bag of dung over her head. A few days later,
Yuan received a threat instructing her to leave Shanghai within three days
unless she wanted a taste of “peanuts” (the meaning of this term was made
explicit by an enclosed bullet).
Yuan’s persecution generated a wave of sympathy in both the main-
stream and the tabloid press. On August 29, Dagong Daily, a left-inclined
mainstream newspaper, reported these incidents with the headline “Refus-
ing to Join the Opportunist Organization, Yuan Xuefen Execrated and
Ambushed—Hit with Dung on Her Way to the Radio Station.” Accord-
ing to the report, when the unionists insisted that Yuan head the board,
she complained to the Social Affairs Bureau and refused to join the union,
since its members were troublemakers, not Yue opera workers. The union-
ists tried to collect union fees from Yuan, even though she was not a mem-
ber. Finally, decisively spurned by Yuan, the unionists resorted to base
methods.
32 A World Morning Newsheadline read “Let an Honest Person Live,”
and the headline in The New Citizen Daily was “Misfortune for a Progressive
Actress of a Traditional Opera.”33
Tian Han was indignant. Using his personal inﬂuence, he called a news
conference to support Yuan and stage a general protest against govern-
ment measures aimed at checking left-wing activities as well as cleansing
obscenity in popular entertainment. About two hundred cultural celebri-
ties, administrators of professional associations, and reporters attended,
among them Guo Moruo, Hong Shen, and Xu Guangping, the linguist Zhao
Jingsheng, the famous “butterﬂy” ﬁction writer and editor Yan Duhe, head
152 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 174 ===

of the Entertainment Association Dong Tianmin, and head of the Performers’
Association Liang Yiming. At the news conference, held on September 10,
1946, a shy but determined Yuan Xuefen discussed her persecution in terms
of women’s liberation and theatrical reform. She described herself as a pro-
gressive actress devoted to Yue opera reform and complained that the union-
ists had attacked her because she refused to join their union. “I hope social
celebrities and journalists will extend their righteous hands to me and uphold
justice.”
34 She also stated: “ It is a small thing if it concerns only my career.
But if this kind of behavior is allowed to continue, then what safeguard is
there for other Yue opera actresses? Or for women’s right to work in gen-
eral?”
35 Xu Guangping also spoke about women’s social status and encour-
aged Yuan and other Yue opera actresses to unite in seeking their own
salvation.
36
It is interesting to note that the celebrity status of left-wing intellectuals
and their direct connection with top CCP leaders such as Mao and Zhou
placed them outside the local Party network and allowed them to act freely
without the Party’s restrictions on underground work. It was, moreover, the
duty of the Party’s local branch to look out for the safety of these left-wing
celebrities. While Tian Han and other celebrities relied on their personal
inﬂuence to gather public support for Yuan Xuefen and used Yuan’s case to
highlight the general discontent of the actors as a whole, the Party’s local
branch had a different perspective and would not risk the underground net-
work for such an event. Yu Ling, head of Shanghai’s underground Commit-
tee on Culture, disapproved of holding a news conference for Yuan. Having
learned that invitations had already been issued, he became concerned ﬁrst
with the safety of Guo Moruo and advised Yuan Xuefen to lie low and not
to overstate her case: “You should be careful with your statement. Simply
say that you are just an actress trying to make a living with your own labor,
and you are persecuted because of this. Stop there. Do not make Guo Moruo
speak, as everyone is watching him.”
37 Yuan, as we have seen, developed her
own strategy, but Guo indeed did not speak at the news conference.
While left-wing intellectuals gave Yuan tremendous moral support and
helped her win the battle of public opinion, the unionists took advantage
of the government’s anti-leftist policy to avenge their grievances against
her. Their persecution of Yuan was primarily a means of keeping their
hold on the young actresses, but it was the government’s anti-leftist stance
that gave them a political pretext for their unlawful actions and allowed
them to get away with it. The Shanghai edition of the Nationalist home
newspaper, Central Daily: Shanghai Edition(Zhongyang ribao: Shanghai ban),
Staging in the Public Arena    153

=== PDF PAGE 175 ===

engaged in a personal attack on Yuan as well as a general attack on her Yue
opera reform. An article, “Yuan Xuefen Exaggerates a Small Incident” (Yuan
Xuefen xiaoti dazuo), blamed Yuan for overreacting to these trivial inci-
dents, accused her of staying out of the union merely to be different, and
refuted her progressiveness with the claim that Yue opera “reform” was noth-
ing but a gross deception.
38 The police conducted a halfhearted investi-
gation of the case that yielded no satisfactory result, and the unionists
continued to harass Yuan in the ensuing months. 
If the left wing and Yuan won the battle of public opinion, then the union-
ists, though suffering bad publicity, managed with some success to con-
tinue to squeeze the young actresses. On October 8, 1946, the union
sponsored a fund-raising performance for its welfare foundation. Yin
Guifang, Zhu Shuizhao, Fu Quanxiang, and several other popular actresses
formed the main cast.
39 Yuan Xuefen and the Xuesheng Company of course
did not participate. Probably as a result, in November, three men intruded
into Yuan’s dressing room, demanding that she go with them to perform
at a private party they had arranged. They informed her that if she refused
to go, then they would claim one-third of her monthly pay as compensa-
tion for their “loss.” In December, she received another threat demanding
a cash contribution to the union.
40 By the end of the year, Yuan Xuefen
resolved to retire. Left-wing intellectuals and journalists sent her off with
a chorus of praise in the print media, honoring her achievements in Yue
opera reform as well as her upright personality.
Though the exact reason for Yuan’s retreat is not clear, it is possible to
surmise several of the problems that faced her. Her ongoing conﬂict with
the unionists certainly caused the theater bosses to worry about possible
negative effects on the box ofﬁce. It also seems to have caused friction among
fellow actresses; some thought she was too harsh with the unionists, who
were, after all, fellow Shengxian natives, while others disliked her simply
because she was different. In addition, her reform agenda appeared too rad-
ical to Yue opera management and some of the other actresses. The New
Yue Opera reforms seemed to have come to a crossroads. According to the
recollections of Cheng Rong, who spent days and nights with Yuan dur-
ing this time, Yuan took to heart the comments she received from the main-
stream and left-wing media and carefully collected all the newspaper
clippings on the topic.
41 She became even more reluctant to perform trite
love stories as she was now subject to so much left-wing expectation after
Sister Xianglin. But she was unsure of how to make Yue opera a vehicle of
social reform while continuing to retain its audience.
42 Other reform
154 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 176 ===

actresses, including Yin Guifang, would not go that far. 43 Yin’s attitude
toward Yue opera reform, emphasizing the centrality of love drama in Yue
opera, was probably more popular among Yue opera professionals, includ-
ing most Yue opera stars and some playwrights such as Xu Jin. Yuan Xue-
fen’s elitist inclinations not only caused her conﬂict with the unionists and
theater bosses but also isolated her to some extent from her fellow actresses
in and outside of the Xuesheng Company. In January 1947, Yuan retired
and left the stage. Fu Quanxiang joined the company, which was renamed
the Dongshan Company, in the main female role.
Looking back at the New Yue Opera reforms after more than half a cen-
tury, Yuan still remembered the frustration she felt at the time and her dis-
may at the lack of a clear vision about reform among her fellow actresses,
describing their mental status as hunhun e’e, meaning nonreﬂective or lack-
ing in understanding.
44 Fortunately for Yuan, history would prove that her
insistence on independence of and respect for the actresses and their pro-
fessional work indeed provided the spirit as well as a clear vision for the
New Yue Opera reforms. Her courageous rejection of the status quo, how-
ever unpopular at the time, demonstrated to her fellow actresses that resis-
tance and change were possible.
The Ten Sisters of Yue Opera: Forging a New Collective Identity
During her retirement, Yuan reﬂected on the situation of Yue opera reform
and concluded that the root of the actresses’ vulnerability lay not so much
in the harassment from the union opportunists but in the near monopoly
exercised by the Yue opera management. In an article published in Daily
News, she wrote:
In Yue opera theater, the theater owners invest in the theater, managing
the box ofﬁce and paying the actresses’ salaries. The employers also inter-
vene in the production. They have their eyes on proﬁt only and never care
about social signiﬁcance or the professional standards of the production. For
them, a good play is one that sells well. Often, better plays are forced from
the stage simply because the sales do not exceed 70 percent (since they pre-
fer 100 percent ticket sales) owing to recession or bad weather. The theater
owners especially like to stage traditional plays, because old plays sell as
well as new plays while costing much less to produce. For traditional plays,
actresses need only to put on ready-made, one-style-for-all costumes and
go onstage, with no consideration for the particular historical setting of the
Staging in the Public Arena    155

=== PDF PAGE 177 ===

act; as such, employers need not pay for new costumes, stage properties,
musical accompaniment, lighting, and other production costs, nor need they
pay for the staff members. As the theater bosses aim entirely for proﬁt, it is
impossible for those of us who seek Yue opera reform to work with them.
45
Besides greed and bias against Yue opera reform, theater owners were also
pressed by ﬁnancial difﬁculties resulting from the postwar recession. The-
ater bosses often threatened to break Yue opera contracts in favor of ﬁlm
screenings whenever sales were slow. The pressure from theater owners
was intense, and actresses constantly worried about job security. Without
job security, it was impossible for actresses to achieve artistic autonomy,
and without reform, the status of Yue opera and its actresses could easily
slide back to their previous low levels, and actresses would remain subju-
gated to theater bosses. Contemplating these issues, Yuan Xuefen began
to entertain a bold idea—to build a theater of her own, a dream so ambi-
tious that few actresses had ever imagined it. But why not? If none of them
could create a theater on her own, maybe together they could. 
Yuan’s idea was that leading actresses would stage a grand show to raise
funds for the creation of their own theater and a Yue opera school for young
girls. They could experiment with reforms with the theater, which would
attract a wider audience while further improving the status of Yue opera.
The revenues would be entirely theirs, and they would use the proﬁts to
establish a Yue opera school, which would help secure their employment
after they retired from the stage. When Yuan Xuefen shared her idea with
other actresses, they all became excited and jumped into it immediately. After
all, despite existing frictions, actresses faced similar problems and shared
similar aspirations, and the need for collective action far outweighed their
disagreements. 
First came the announcement that the show was to open on August 18
and end on September 21. On July 29, 1947, ten leading actresses gathered
at a Western-style restaurant on Fuzhou Road and produced a contract
signed by all ten in the presence of a lawyer. The contract was indeed a
manifesto and succinctly summarized the purposes and principles of the
fund-raising production: 
After several meetings, we have found that we all share the same goals of
sustaining the art of New Yue Opera and ensuring the welfare of our fellow
actresses. We hereby decide to act together as cofounders in organizing
a company for the construction of a new-style theater. From now on,
156 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 178 ===

cofounders shall be mutually responsible and do their best to ensure the
smooth operation of the theater and performances, and so to forge a bright
future for Yue opera. The cofounders of the organization have absolutely
equal rights and responsibilities. With this contract signed, cofounders shall
work to raise investment capital, either through personal connections or
through collective fund-raising performances and radio broadcasting, and
to attract shareholders. Each cofounder shall do her best to work toward these
goals and shall not break the agreement or neglect her responsibilities.
46
The ten leading actresses who signed the contract were Yin Guifang, Fu
Quanxiang, Yuan Xuefen, Xiao Dangui, Fan Ruijuan, Zhang Guifeng, Xu
Yulan, Zhu Shuizhao, Wu Xiaolou, and Xu Tianhong—now known as the
“ten sisters” of Yue opera (see ﬁg. 4.2). 
Nan Wei, Han Yi, and Cheng Rong, in the meanwhile, scripted a new
play for the fund-raising show, For the Love of the Country(Shanhe lian), which
transposed the story of Alexandre Dumas’s The Three Musketeersinto an ancient
Chinese setting drawn from the Ming historical novel Histories of the States
in the Eastern Zhou Dynasty (Dongzhou lieguo zhi). The play tells a compli-
cated story of desire, jealousy, conspiracy, and double crosses in a court
struggle involving the king of Liang; his lusty minister; a beautiful princess
and her lover, a prince of the Cao kingdom; an evil royal concubine; two
righteous palace maidservants; and two righteous generals. The story had
no obvious political message but instead focused on an intriguing good-
versus-evil kind of melodrama played out on a grand scale (see ﬁg. 4.3). 
The play’s greatest attraction obviously lay in its all-star cast and grandiose
stage sets. The ten sisters dedicated themselves wholeheartedly to the fund-
raising project and wanted the show to be a great event. They had often
staged fund-raising performances for other organizations, but this was the
ﬁrst time such an event would beneﬁt their own cause. Yin Guifang, for exam-
ple, gave up a rare opportunity to make a Yue opera movie out of one of her
popular plays. It would have been the ﬁrst Yue opera ﬁlm had Yin decided
to participate. Yuan Xuefen voluntarily played the smallest role, in order to
refute her critics’ accusation that she initiated the production to enhance her
own fame. The actresses were electriﬁed and wanted everything to be per-
fect: the theater, the costumes and stage setting, and the media coverage.
The young actresses, however, underestimated the difﬁculties their
project was to face. Yuan Xuefen had consulted Yu Ling, who had expressed
doubts about the project’s feasibility. But Yuan was too excited, and per-
haps too naive, to heed Yu Ling’s warning. For one thing, many sponsors
Staging in the Public Arena    157

=== PDF PAGE 179 ===

were interested in getting their hands on the money the actresses were
expected to make. For many, it was simply unthinkable that these young
girls could or should keep the proﬁts for themselves.
The ﬁrst major expense was to rent a theater. The actresses wanted a
large theater for their event and decided on the Grand Golden Theater,
which was unoccupied for the summer season. But the rental terms the
actresses obtained from Zhou Xinfang, the famous Beijing opera actor who
held the long-term lease on the theater, were harsh: the actresses not only
had to pay a vast sum for rent but also had to furnish one month’s salary
158 Staging in the Public Arena
4.2  The ten sisters of Yue opera, upon deciding to launch a production to raise funds
for a theater of their own, 1947 . Front row, from left: Xu Tianhong, Fu Quanxiang, Yuan
Xuefen, Zhu Zhuizhao, Fan Ruijuan, and Wu Xiaolou. Back row, from left: Zhang
Guifeng, Xiao Dangui, Xu Yulan, and Yin Guifang. (Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997)

=== PDF PAGE 180 ===

for Zhou’s entire company during the summer recess. The cost for the the-
ater in the end amounted to one-fourth of the box ofﬁce revenue for all
the performances. Zhou certainly was a shrewd businessman and made a
huge proﬁt from the rental while depriving the theater employees.
47
The actresses had another expense, to be expected in the case of such
magniﬁcent fund-raising, and that was to pay various native-place thugs
so that they would not cause trouble.
48 The unionists, understanding that
they were excluded from a share in this grand production, called a press
conference to attack the actresses for having abandoned their teachers
and “affronted their ancestors” (qishi miezu).
49 The Nationalist soldiers also
wanted their share, and since they had not received free tickets, they rushed
into the theater one day, expelling the audience and taking their seats. The
actresses had no choice but to accommodate them.
Staging in the Public Arena    159
4.3  The ten sisters of Yue opera staged For the Love of the Country (Shanhe lian), 1947, to
raise funds for building their own theater. Although the actresses did not achieve their
goal, the performances deeply impressed audiences and the general public and did
much to raise Yue opera’s social status. (Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997)

=== PDF PAGE 181 ===

The government and the CCP were both aware of the large sums of
money the show was drawing into the theater. Yu Ling assigned two men
to help Yuan Xuefen and the actresses with accounting and logistics, while
the actresses, probably in an effort to avoid being squeezed by the govern-
ment, also invited Wang Canzhi, daughter of the revolutionary martyr Qiu
Jin and an ofﬁcial at the tax bureau of the municipal government, to head
the proposed Yue opera training school. But this did not appease the gov-
ernment. Ofﬁcials were skeptical that the young actresses—mostly illiter-
ate, apolitical, knowing nothing but their trivial opera plays—could have
come up with such an ambitious fund-raising effort solely by themselves,
and they suspected that the revenue would ﬂow into the hands of the CCP
underground. Halfway through the show’s run, the Social Affairs Bureau
suddenly issued an interdiction, charging that the actresses had not prop-
erly completed registration procedures, and appointed a special board of
trustees to oversee the funds raised by the production. The trustees included
Wang Canzhi, Wang Xiaolai, and a few other government ofﬁcials. The ban
against the show was lifted only when the actresses agreed to place the funds
under the trustees’ control for three months.
50 Up until then, the show had
stimulated public enthusiasm, and tickets were selling well. The government’s
disruption had a negative effect on the box ofﬁce, and the second phase of
the production did not go so well. Other elements may also have been at
work. Not least was competition from the China Great Theater (Zhong-
guo Daxiyuan), where Beijing opera superstars—including Mei Lanfang,
Meng Xiaodong, Zhang Junqiu, Ma Lianliang, and Zhou  Xinfang—
performed from September 3 to 13 in celebration of Du Yuesheng’s sixti-
eth birthday; these dates coincided with the second phase of the ten sisters’
production. Most Yue opera stars also performed at Du’s private parties to
show their respect for him. Yuan Xuefen, as usual, did not go. 
When the performances concluded, the revenue was less than had been
expected. After settling bills for costumes, salaries, and the theater rental,
there wasn’t much left. The trustees then froze the funds for a few months,
while inﬂation mounted. When the trustees ﬁnally released the fund, after
entertaining themselves with a banquet, the account was worth only
ninety-six taels of gold. In the end, it was only enough for the actresses to
rent a small two-story house with three rooms. They ﬁxed up a small stage
downstairs and put up a plaque that read “Shanghai Yue Opera Experimental
School.” The government never issued a permit for this school.
The fund-raising project, though it did not succeed as intended, was a
big success in that it projected a positive, upbeat image of the Yue opera
160 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 182 ===

actress to the public. On August 11 and 12, a week before the opening
night, the ten sisters launched a promotional radio campaign. Each went
to the station to sing pieces from the new play and to answer calls from
the audience. The two-day promotion climaxed with the ten actresses
singing together in a chorus. Mainstream newspapers as well as tabloids
covered the fund-raising show with eye-catching headlines, and the phrase
“ten sisters of Yue opera” permeated Shanghai’s mass media, marking the
beginning of a new collective identity for the actresses. 
The tabloid Robin Hood (Luobinhan), for example, ﬁrst reported the ten
actresses’ initiative on August 5 in an article headlined “Ten Leading Yue
Opera Actresses Successfully Cooperated.” The report notes: 
This organization [Yuelian Company, founded by the ten sisters] is an inno-
vation in any opera circle, for it is rare and precious that ﬁrst-rate actresses
might join hands like this.
51
A few days later, another article in the tabloid praised Yue opera actresses
and criticized Beijing opera:
The Yue opera circle unites tightly under the leadership of Master [Xian
Sheng] Yuan Xuefen (as everybody addresses her). The actresses are work-
ing hard to collect funds for a Yue opera school and a theater of their own.
In contrast, Beijing opera, though esteemed as the National opera and with
so many famous actors, does not compare. It is such a pity that famous Bei-
jing opera actors all take care only of their own business; they cannot rival
these young ladies full of progressive ideas and actions.
52
On August 28, the tabloid carried a report mocking the unionists. Accord-
ing to the news, the Yue Opera Workers’ Union convened a press confer-
ence on Teachers’ Day to air its complaints that Yue opera had fallen under
the spell of women. “Today is Teachers’ Day, and everyone should pro-
mote respect for teachers,” the union spokesman was quoted as saying. “But
the younger generation of Yue opera performers pays their teachers no
respect—they enjoy drinking the clear water but forget its source. We there-
fore ask you reporters to uphold justice for us.” The article continues:
The original purpose of this press conference was to ask the ten leading
actresses, including Yuan Xuefen and Fu Quanxiang, to each hire one male
Yue opera teacher for their companies, so as to help the teachers make a liv-
Staging in the Public Arena    161

=== PDF PAGE 183 ===

ing. One of the union representatives’ comments caused the assembled jour-
nalists much consternation. He said, “We are not as rich as Yuan Xuefen,
and today’s reception has not been easy for us to prepare. We have spent
ten days collecting to make possible even these simple snacks.” He even
addressed the reporters as “comrades.” Having heard him, the reporters could
only smile at one another. Feeling sorry for the unionists, the reporters
refrained from consuming the snacks.
53
Mainstream newspapers reported this event differently. The New Citizen
Evening News published interviews with each of the ten actresses. Yuan Xue-
fen was quoted as saying, “To accomplish anything requires cooperation
and collective action. One person can do nothing. We all work for the future
of New Yue Opera, not for personal fame.”
54 Yin Guifang remarked, “I have
been thinking about training more young actresses in this transitional period,
when an older generation has already passed and the new is yet to come.
But I cannot make it happen alone. So when Xuefen talked with me about
the Yue opera school, I was really excited. This undertaking will fail,
though, if it must depend only on us ten sisters. We need lots of friends to
care for the school and to help. Support us.”
55 An enthusiastic Tian Han
published an article in The New Citizen Evening Newstitled “United, You Have
Power!” in which he pointed out that it was already a great achievement for
the actresses to have brought off such a production.
56
Thus, in the process of this grand fund-raising, a new collective iden-
tity emerged among the leading Yue opera actresses, one of progressive,
modern, and autonomous art workers. Correspondingly, this self-conscious
identity was successfully projected in the news media in the image of the
young, upbeat, and reform-minded actresses of Yue opera. It was also dur-
ing this process that Yue opera actresses began to appear as subject-agents
in the news media, making the news themselves and deﬁning their own
positions, rather than being reported and commented upon as before. In
this context, Yue opera actresses took on a central role in the Xiao Dangui
incident and staged a self-directed social drama in the public arena. 
The Xiao Dangui Incident: Competing Narratives
On October 13, 1947, less than one month after the end of the fund-rais-
ing performances, one of the ten sisters, Xiao Dangui, committed suicide
at her home. Xiao Dangui was from a poor peasant family in Shengxian.
162 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 184 ===

She was given away as a child bride at the age of eight and joined a girls’
opera school, the Gaosheng Theater, at ten. Hardworking and talented, Xiao
distinguished herself during her school years and took up a leading role imme-
diately after her apprenticeship. During the 1930s, she performed with the
Gaosheng Theater all over Zhejiang and made a good impression on Shang-
hai audiences as well. In early 1938, Xiao caused a sensation when she per-
formed with the Gaosheng Theater in “island” Shanghai (see ﬁg. 4.4). 
Qiu Guangxian, owner of the Gaosheng Theater, was also a Shengxian
native and the highly disciplined patriarch of the school. Qiu’s admoni-
tion to the students may be summarized in the two sentences he often
uttered: “Carry yourself pure and clean; perform honestly and earnestly.”
He not only hired the best teachers so that the students would receive good
training in the operatic arts but also safeguarded the girls’ moral and sex-
ual purity. He set up strict rules forbidding socialization between men and
women within the school and even hired a female manager to supervise
the girls’ everyday lives. When the school toured urban centers such as
Hangzhou and Shanghai, Qiu always kept his eye on the students, not allow-
ing them to socialize with local audiences lest they be seduced by money,
sex, and the corrupt urban life, especially that of colonial Shanghai. In 1939,
after a successful eight-month run in Shanghai and in the midst of a boom
Staging in the Public Arena    163
4.4  Stage photo of Xiao Dangui in Qing-style
dress. (Zhongguo Yueju 1989)

=== PDF PAGE 185 ===

in women’s Shengxian opera, Qiu decided to leave Shanghai. A strict dis-
ciplinarian, he could no longer prevent his actresses from becoming pop-
ular stars—the objects of public desire and the subjects of their own fates.
Qiu applied a harsh punishment called “red all around,” beating all the girls
if one girl did something wrong. Even this could not stop the actresses from
sneaking out of the dorm or receiving gifts behind his back. Losing con-
trol and fearing the consequences of the girls’ behavior, Qiu took the troupe
back to eastern Zhejiang to perform in Ningbo, Shaoxing, and Shengxian.
57
In 1940, Qiu retired and disbanded the Gaosheng Theater. At this point,
Zhang Chunfan came and recruited Xiao and several veteran Gaosheng
Theater actresses. Xiao returned to Shanghai and quickly became one of
the most popular Yue opera stars in the city. When Xiao and her fellow
actresses ﬁrst came back to Shanghai, they all lived in the backstage area
of the Zhedong Theater, where they performed. But before long, Xiao
moved upstairs where Zhang Chunfan and his wife and children lived. Xiao
and Zhang soon became sexually involved and lived together for about six
years before Xiao’s suicide.
58
Zhang Chunfan, the defendant in the case, was also a Shengxian native.
He came to Shanghai in 1930 to work in a silk factory and later became
the manager of two small silk mills. In early 1940, seeing the boom in
women’s Shengxian opera in Shanghai, Zhang decided to seek his fortune
in the opera business. He organized a troupe with Xiao Dangui as the lead-
ing actress and made a fortune in the next several years. Zhang was a capa-
ble man in his own way. By all accounts, he was greedy, controlling, and
bullying, on the one hand, and generous, chivalrous, and useful to his friends,
on the other. Zhang was a tough self-made local strongman with little edu-
cation. He gathered a gang of followers who would not hesitate to use vio-
lence against his enemies and also organized and headed the Yue Opera
Employers’ Union. With his tough style and connections within the trade
and through the Shengxian native-place organization, Zhang made him-
self one of the most powerful men in Yue opera circles.
59
At ﬁrst, Xiao’s death seemed like just another sensational suicide of a
popular female star. On the next day, October 14, the Leyuan Funeral
House, which had held Ruan Lingyu’s funeral twelve years before and
where Xiao Dangui’s body now lay, became the center of attention. While
newspaper headlines were preoccupied with Xiao’s suicide, tens of thou-
sands of spectators crowded the Leyuan Funeral House. Press reports were
eager to point out similarities between the two tragic deaths of famous
actresses twelve years apart. Dagong Daily reported on October 15: “All
164 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 186 ===

the Yue opera stars in Shanghai went to mourn [Xiao]. The situation after
Xiao’s death is comparable to that after the death of the movie star Ruan
Lingyu years ago. Both incidents created a public stir. For this reason, the
police take the incident seriously and are investigating the cause of Xiao
Dangui’s suicide.”
60 Mainstream newspapers, however, seemed unwilling
to get into reporting on sex scandals, the so-called peach-colored news,
as the despised tabloid press had done with the Ruan Lingyu incident.
Trying to offer some explanation for Xiao’s suicide, the Dagong Dailyreport
came up with three points, most likely inﬂuenced by family members liv-
ing with Xiao and Zhang. First, Xiao’s business was losing money, and she
was indebted for up to 400 million yuan, an especially heavy debt because
she had quit performing after the departure of her stage partner Xu Yulan.
Second, Xiao was frustrated because she felt that public reaction to her
performance during the recent fund-raising show was not as favorable as
for other actresses. And third, the report vaguely implied that she had
some family trouble.
But events soon took a different turn on October 16, the day of Xiao’s
funeral, when the remaining nine Yue opera sisters charged that Zhang’s
abuse of Xiao was the cause of the actress’s demise. Using their power as
public icons, the actresses staged a social drama in which they were both
directors and protagonists, setting up Zhang Chunfan as the defendant in
a public trial. On that day, Yue opera theaters throughout the city can-
celed scheduled performances in solidarity in order to pay respects to the
deceased Xiao. Many Yue opera actresses attended the funeral, where they
became the main attraction for fans and the general public. About twenty
thousand Yue opera fans and Shanghai residents once more crowded the
funeral house; a few hundred of them broke into the funeral parlor, dam-
aging the furniture, and a portrait of the deceased Xiao went missing.
61
Focusing on the dramatis personae, represented as “the nine sisters of
the deceased,” media coverage quickly responded to the actresses and their
charges against Zhang. Dagong Daily reported:
Zhang Chunfan has now become the target of the people. The nine sisters
met yesterday [October 16]. They request that no one cooperate with
Zhang and that Zhang be thrown out of the Yue opera business. The Guo-
tai Theater was bought with Xiao Dangui’s personal savings, and therefore
Zhang should not be allowed to manage its business. They [the nine sisters]
should take charge of the business of the theater. The proﬁts from the the-
ater will be used to take care of Xiao Dangui’s grave and annual memorial
Staging in the Public Arena    165

=== PDF PAGE 187 ===

service, and the rest should go to her family [meaning her natal family in
Shengxian] for their daily use.62
On October 18, Shanghai Newspaper’s headline read: “Actress Xiao Leaves
2.1 Billion in Property, the Yue Opera Circle Makes Two Points—Suicide
Had Nothing to Do with Financial Difﬁculties, Xiao Had No Dubious Sex-
ual Relationship.”
63 The article continued: “they [the nine sisters] will con-
tinue to press Zhang Chunfan and, at the same time, call for the support
of the public in upholding justice in order to ﬁnd out the real cause of Xiao’s
suicide.”
64 As the actresses requested, Zhang handed an inventory of Xiao’s
belongings and property to the mediator, Huang Jinrong, the godfather
of Shanghai’s notorious Green Gang whose daughter-in-law was Xiao’s
adoptive mother. In the meantime, the nine sisters were reportedly plan-
ning a huge memorial service for Xiao, and a Yue opera play relating the
story of her suicide was soon to open; according to the article, it was
expected to cause another public sensation.
65 In fact, more than one Yue
opera company staged the story. Xiao’s suicide soon became a popular sub-
ject not only for Yue opera but also for other entertainment forms such as
Suzhou story-singing and Shanghai opera.
On October 20, Dagong Daily published an interview with Leng Shan,
Xiao’s director, whom Zhang accused of having had a dubious relation-
ship with Xiao. In this interview, Leng appeared as an honest intellectual
who, accepting the suggestions of his friends in spoken drama, had entered
Xiao’s company to help reform Yue opera. Xiao was portrayed as morally
scrupulous and an eager student of modern arts, unlike most other actresses
in the company. The relationship between Leng and Xiao was purely one
between a leading actress and her director, or between a student and a
teacher. Watching movies and discussing performing skills were, accord-
ing to Leng, part of Xiao’s preparation for pursuing her goal of acting on-
screen. In the evening of October 7, Leng recounted, he and Xiao set out
to see a Hollywood movie. It was a little early, so they went for a walk.
They became involved in a discussion about acting skill and never made
it to the movie. The next morning, Leng told the reporter, he was sum-
moned to Zhang’s house, where Zhang demanded that he tell the truth
about the previous night. Leng told the reporter: “I want to make a clear
statement about my pure friendship with Xiao. But my sincere oath did
not win understanding from a jealous Zhang, and in the end, a weak woman
had to resort to suicide. I feel sorry and deep sorrow for her.” Other news-
166 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 188 ===

papers also focused on Zhang’s unfounded jealousy and his subsequent mal-
treatment of Xiao, which, according to popular belief, ultimately caused
the actress’s suicide. It seems that by this time Zhang was already presumed
guilty in the public eye.
66
As the social drama and the theatrical performance of Xiao’s tragedy
unfolded, the police were obliged to take action and arrested Zhang as “the
main suspect in the case of Xiao’s suicide.”
67 On October 31, newspapers
published excerpts from Zhang’s lengthy statement of self-defense, writ-
ten in police custody. Zhang described a nearly consummated affair
between Xiao and Leng, portraying Leng Shan as immoral and Xiao as a
confused woman who would have been seduced by Leng if not for Zhang’s
advice. But his self-defense had little impact on the police detectives. That
same day, after more than ten days of investigation, the police charged
Zhang as an accessory to Xiao’s suicide and took him in handcuffs to the
jail at the District Prosecution Ofﬁce. The police spokesman made a state-
ment at a news conference: “After Xiao Dangui committed suicide, the police
took Zhang Chunfan into custody and investigated him in order to
strengthen the law, reassure the public, and make the truth known.” The
main evidence of Zhang’s offense, the ofﬁcer said, was his refusal to accept
Xiao’s repeated avowal that her body was pure and clean and his subse-
quent maltreatment of Xiao. Zhang may have even told Xiao to kill her-
self, the police ofﬁcer reasoned.
68 Then, on November 5, the trial opened,
and the public prosecutor charged Zhang with abetting Xiao’s suicide.
Since Zhang Chunfan had long been presumed guilty in the public eye,
the court trial was at ﬁrst presented in the daily newspapers much as the
preceding newspaper trial had been—the same story told, and with the
same witnesses. “Yuan Xuefen,” a Shanghai Newspaperreport on the trial read,
“is an outsider. It is only because Xiao’s death was so pitiable that she, as
Xiao’s sworn sister, appeals to the court to redress the injustice done to
Xiao.”
69
The story was accompanied with a shot of a frustrated Zhang Chun-
fan, in long gown, walking into the court under police escort, and another
showing Yuan Xuefen, wearing a plain cheongsam and smiling, posing for
the reporter in front of the courtroom, with Leng Shan, wearing glasses
and a Western-style suit, in the background (see ﬁg. 4.5). The contrast is
interesting. Leng Shan’s appearance as a young Western-style intellectual
is juxtaposed to the older Zhang Chunfan’s traditional outﬁt and style, with
Yuan Xuefen smiling conﬁdently in the foreground.
Staging in the Public Arena    167

=== PDF PAGE 189 ===

On December 27, the district court acquitted Zhang, for charges against
him did not constitute positive evidence, and released him soon after the
verdict.70 Zhang emerged from the jail after two and half months, to ﬁnd
himself disgraced in the public eye and deprived of a chance to beneﬁt
from the wealth that Xiao had left behind her. Xiao Dangui’s older brother,
from her hometown of Changle Township in Shengxian, was recognized
as her legal heir and inherited Xiao’s property and personal belongings.
71
Throughout the incident, the nine actresses, cast as the nine sisters,
assumed a central role in the public arena, affected the progress of events,
and re-created themselves as powerful public ﬁgures in the mainstream
media. Although their initial demand that they be permitted to take over
168 Staging in the Public Arena
4.5  A Shanghai Newspaper (Shen bao) article on the Xiao Dangui incident, 
November 5, 1947 . Left: Yuan Xuefen in the foreground with Leng Shan to her right.
Right: Zhang Chunfan under police escort.

=== PDF PAGE 190 ===

the Guotai Theater, so as to realize the dream of having a theater of their
own, soon proved without legal basis, they succeeded in compromising the
prestige of theater owners, casting them in the image of a defeated Zhang
Chunfan. How did this happen? How could these young actresses dare to
pursue a local strongman like Zhang Chunfan? And what was their moti-
vation? In a 1995 interview, Fu Quanxiang responded: “We were outraged.
We just wanted to avenge the deceased Xiao Dangui [da baobuping]. I don’t
know where I got the guts. Zhang Chunfan’s men threatened us, saying,
‘Do you want to keep your hands? Do you want to keep your legs? Or do
you care about your pretty face?’ It was scary. We were really bold.”
72 Yuan
Xuefen, who assumed the leadership in this ﬁght, and Xu Yulan, who had
been Xiao’s stage partner not long before Xiao’s death, provided similar
answers.
73
The actresses suggested that they had no other motivation than to avenge
the deceased Xiao Dangui. They had good reason to exact vengeance from
Zhang Chunfan. One of the most powerful theater bosses in the trade,
Zhang was monopolistic and ruthless and had no respect for the actresses.
The actresses were also angry about the way Zhang had treated Xiao. As
they saw it, Zhang, a married man, took control of Xiao’s sexuality and
used her artistic talent to advance his dominance in the Yue opera busi-
ness. Moreover, the actresses believed that Zhang, while beneﬁting from
Xiao’s talent, abused her privately at home. It was quite obvious to the
actresses that Xiao would not have resorted to suicide if Zhang had not
humiliated her and treated her unjustly.
Many actresses had the impression that Xiao was an unhappy woman
whose weak personality made her easy prey for Zhang.
74 They reasoned
that Xiao had committed suicide out of desperation for several reasons: her
popularity was in a decline, due to Zhang’s hostility to Yue opera reform
and his insistence that she play erotic characters; as her career drew to an
end, she would become ﬁnancially less useful to Zhang and thus subject
to more abuse; and Zhang had already showed signs of disliking her. While
it is not certain that Xiao had feared for her future because of tepid ticket
sales for her shows, the actresses’ reasoning was grounded in the reality of
wife/concubine abuse permitted by the polygamous patriarchal system. To
the actresses, Zhang appeared to be just such a local strongman who had
no hesitation about abusing his power. Xiao’s suicide once again conﬁrmed
him as a bully.
The actresses’ enormous sympathy for Xiao and their anger with her
abuser derived from their identiﬁcation with certain tragic elements in
Staging in the Public Arena    169

=== PDF PAGE 191 ===

Xiao’s case. The abuse Xiao suffered was, for the actresses, part and par-
cel of the more general abuse of women in the Yue opera trade and in
society at large. Ma Zhanghua’s distress at the hands of another theater
boss, Lu Gendi, was still a fresh memory. Fu Quanxiang herself had endured
misery in her ﬁrst marriage as the second wife of the owner of the Shen-
zhou Inn, and she had recently initiated her own divorce. Yuan Xuefen
was a self-proclaimed celibate. Xiao-Bai Yumei, Shi Yinghua, and Yao Shui-
juan all had unhappy marriages. 
In a broader sense, Xiao Dangui’s tragic death became an outlet for
women to speak their feelings through public agitation. When the nine
sisters launched the public campaign charging Zhang Chunfan as Xiao Dan-
gui’s true murderer, they spoke not only for themselves, and for the
deceased, but also to the sensibilities of many women. Yue opera fans, con-
cubines as well as principal wives, knew their grievances, and some were
able to identify Xiao’s tragedy with their own suffering. During the uproar
after Xiao’s death, Dagong Dailyreported an episode in which a Yue opera
fan, Zhang Jinfeng, tried to kill herself. Zhang Jinfeng was obsessed with
Xiao’s case. She went to the Leyuan Funeral House to attend Xiao’s funeral
and followed the news passionately every day, so much so that she neg-
lected her housekeeping chores. Her mother-in-law scolded her, saying,
“If you are so concerned, why not go with Xiao yourself?” On the morn-
ing of October 26, Zhang Jinfeng drank a large quantity of gasoline in an
attempt to kill herself. Her husband took her to the hospital, and her life
was saved.
75
The actresses won public support not only because they articulated
women’s sensibilities, elicited by Xiao’s tragic death, but also because they
succeeded in claiming the virtue of qingbai, or purity and cleanliness, through
Yue opera reform. They had cleansed the opera of sexual obscenity and
earnestly produced decent, sometimes socially meaningful, love dramas,
and they had created a public image of themselves as respectable, modern
art workers through the staging of Sister Xianglin and recent fund-raising
events. If there was any doubt about Xiao’s qingbai, Xiao had puriﬁed her-
self by giving up her life. The irony was, however, that the actresses were
able to prevail as modern public ﬁgures only because they were ﬁrmly
grounded in a traditional rendering of women’s virtue. Zhang Chunfan, in
fact, invoked the concept of qingbaito criticize Xiao’s wrongdoing and jus-
tify the pressure he placed upon her. In his statement to the police, he
stressed that he pressed Xiao because he was concerned about her qingbai,
which was in jeopardy because of Leng Shan’s seduction. Zhang’s Sheng-
170 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 192 ===

xian supporters had even fabricated a sensational story of the alleged seduc-
tion.76 Their story, like that of the unionists, was hindered by its outdated
language and style to the extent that it sounds laughable to the modern
reader. But in the end, only because the actresses had acquired the virtue
of qingbai could they summon up enormous social sympathy, try the
alleged abuser in the public forum, and turn a sexual scandal into a social
drama of justice for women.
The Republican Actress T ransformed in the Public Sphere
In May 1935, upon the death of Ruan Lingyu, Lu Xun pointed out with
great pain the silence of the actress in the middle of the public uproar:
“Gossip is frightening” is a sentence that we read in movie star Ruan 
Ling yu’s suicide note, found after her death. After a lot of empty chatter,
generated by the heartrending incident of her tragic death, public atten-
tion has gradually cooled. As soon as the drama Fragrant Lingyu Vanishes with
the Wind (Lingyu xiangxiao ji) stops playing, the whole incident will fade
away, leaving no trace, just like Ai Xia’s suicide a year ago. Their deaths
were a grain of salt dropped into the endless sea of gossip, adding some
ﬂavor. But soon, the gossip trade will be the same as before—tasteless and
meaningless.
77
Contending that the media’s sensational descriptions of Ruan Lingyu’s case
were just another form of dalliance with women, Lu Xun continued:
She [Ruan Lingyu] was slandered [by the media] with colorful inventions
but had no way to clear herself. Couldn’t she ﬁght, some say? But since she
did not have a home newspaper [ jiguan bao], how could she ﬁght? She had
grievances, and injustice had been done to her. But since she did not have
a clear enemy, whom should she ﬁght? If we can put ourselves in her shoes,
then we may understand the truth in her statement “gossip is frightening,”
as well as the truth in people’s conviction that her suicide had to do with
the media.
78
Ruan Lingyu’s words ﬁnally reached the public arena only after her lam-
entable suicide. A voice as weak as this, crying that “gossip is frightening,”
needed suicide to pierce indifference. Many died voiceless, only to excite
even more sound and fury in the gossip media. Actresses served as the
Staging in the Public Arena    171

=== PDF PAGE 193 ===

objects of a public culture of erotica—to be imagined, described, discussed,
interpreted, and spoken for. If they were unfortunately entangled in sex-
ual scandal, a favorite subject of the gossip media, the cost of their redemp-
tion was sometimes nothing less than death: only thus could they
communicate protest and recover their innocence in the public eye, as we
have seen repeatedly in the cases of Ai Xia, Ruan Lingyu, Ma Zhanghua,
and Xiao Dangui. 
Remarkably, the death of Xiao Dangui in October 1947 invoked a social
drama that was very different from anything the public had seen. In 1935,
male intellectuals seized on Ruan Lingyu’s death to lecture the public and
the gossip media on women’s liberation and theatrical reform, but twelve
years later, Yue opera actresses took center stage in the media to speak for
themselves and seek justice for Xiao Dangui. This change clearly signaled
the ascent of Yue opera actresses in the public arena, from silent objects
of sexual scandals or reformist discourses to articulate subject-agents with
full social status.
172 Staging in the Public Arena

=== PDF PAGE 194 ===

173
Chapter 5
The Opera as History
On October 1, 1949, Yuan Xuefen climbed to the balcony of the Gate of
Heavenly Peace (Tiananmen), along with a few hundred representatives
to the First Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, to witness
Chairman Mao Zedong declare the founding of the People’s Republic of
China. Yuan was one of four actors selected to represent the local-opera
profession nationwide; the other three were the famous Beijing opera mas-
ters Mei Lanfang, Cheng Yanqiu, and Zhou Xinfang (see ﬁg. 5.1). Yu Ling,
the former chair of Shanghai’s CCP underground Committee on Culture
and now head of the Division of Arts in Shanghai’s new government, had
sent Yuan, along with Zhou Xinfang, to Beijing as a special representative
of local operas. From then on, Yuan’s personal fortunes were tied to her
relationship with the new government. 
At ﬁrst, Yuan recalled, she did not want to attend the meeting. She told
Yu Ling that she was not interested in politics, because politics was dirty,
and she wanted only to be a good actor. Unsettled by her sudden status as
an equal of such important cultural ﬁgures as Mei Lanfang and Zhou Xin-
fang, Yuan told Yu Ling that she did not deserve the honor. Yu Ling sim-
ply asked, as Yuan recalled: “You say you don’t like politics. Do you know
what politics is?” Yu Ling continued: “Politics is ﬁrst of all to make clear
what is right and what is wrong.” Once in Beijing and after being received
by Premier Zhou Enlai, Yuan changed her mind. Zhou told her that he had
secretly attended one of her performances in 1946 and had known of her
for some time. She found the premier to be extremely nice and friendly,
quite the opposite of what she had imagined high ofﬁcials to be. She was
equally surprised to discover that her old friends Yu Ling, Tian Han, and


=== PDF PAGE 195 ===

Liu Housheng had been members of the CCP underground and were now
ofﬁcials of the new government. 1
Yuan joined the Communist Party in 1954. In 1955, she was appointed
head of the newly established ofﬁcial Shanghai Yue Opera House. A decade
later, she was persecuted during the Cultural Revolution, like many other
ofﬁcials, but her standing was restored immediately afterward, and she
remained in the position until she retired in 1985. She was also a long-term
representative to the National People’s Congress and a member of its ﬁfth,
sixth, and seventh Standing Committees. In the meantime, she starred in
a few New Yue Opera classics and two of the most inﬂuential Yue opera
ﬁlms, Butterﬂy Lovers(1953) and Sister Xianglin(1978).
2 Yuan and her colleagues
at the Shanghai Yue Opera House performed internationally and enter-
tained numerous foreign diplomats as representatives of China’s traditional
arts. Her political and artistic stature, combined with Yue opera’s popular
success, made Yue opera one of the most important in the nation.
Beginning in the late 1980s, however, Yue opera was caught in the trend
of a general decline in native operas, suffered a sharp downturn in its pop-
ularity, and quickly lost its place in mainstream popular entertainment. In
174 The Opera as History
5.1  Yuan Xuefen with three Beijing opera actors, representatives of the traditional
opera circle at the First National Political Consultative Council, 1949. From left: 
Cheng Yanqiu, Yuan Xuefen, Mei Lanfang, and Zhou Xinfang. (Yuan 2002)

=== PDF PAGE 196 ===

the ensuing two decades, Yue opera performances were few and the audi-
ence was small. The few remaining Yue opera troupes relied entirely or par-
tially on government subsidies to pay for salaries and production expenses.
By the end of the twentieth century, it became clear that Yue opera’s glory
as a shining popular-culture phenomenon had passed. Signiﬁcantly, the rise
of Yue opera actresses from lowly female entertainers/prostitutes to
respected professional art workers, popular media icons, and even mem-
bers of the cultural elite proved to be irreversible, despite the genre’s decline. 
How did the communist revolution and the PRC state affect Yue opera
and its actresses? The vicissitudes of the opera and its actresses in the lat-
ter half of the twentieth century unfolded under the heavy-handed inter-
vention of a socialist state during the early PRC period through the
Cultural Revolution and within the context of waves of modern economic
development and urban migration in the post-Mao era of “reform and open-
ing [to the world]” (gaige kaifang) in the 1980s and 1990s. While the story
of Yue opera and its actresses was still evolving, interpretations of this very
story were put forward, seeking not only to deﬁne Yue opera’s history but
also to inﬂuence its future development. This chapter explores the dynamic
relationship between the opera and its actresses, on the one hand, and the
communist revolution and the PRC state, on the other, as well as the nar-
ratives about this relationship produced during the half-century after 1949.
The discussion develops through a reading of two productions about the
history of Yue opera: the 1965 ﬁlm Stage Sisters (Wutai jiemei), directed by
Xie Jin, representing a communist interpretation of Yue opera’s history, and
the Yue opera play by the same title, produced in 1998 by the Shanghai
Yue Opera House, revealing an understanding of Yue opera’s history and
self-identity as deﬁned by Yue opera people themselves.
Narrating the Yue Opera Story in Film 
The ﬁlm Stage Sisters tells the story of two Yue opera actresses from the
Shengxian countryside who take different life paths after entering the dan-
gerous metropolis of 1940s Shanghai. Zhu Chunhua chooses to abide by
her teacher’s admonition, “carry yourself pure and clean; perform earnestly
and honestly,” and she eventually joins the CCP-led “progressive forces”
( jinbu liliang), a CCP term describing social forces sympathetic to the left-
ist agenda and critical of the Nationalist government in Republican Shang-
hai during the Civil War. By contrast, Xing Yuehong, longing for wealth
and the status of a bourgeois housewife, marries a theater boss in order to
The Opera as History    175

=== PDF PAGE 197 ===

secure her desired lifestyle. She ultimately falls victim to the evil theater
boss, who soon tires of her and then sacriﬁces her, under order of Nation-
alist ofﬁcials, in an effort to obstruct Chunhua’s progressive activities. Finally,
after Liberation, in 1949, the theater boss ﬂees Shanghai for Taiwan, while
Chunhua invites Yuehong to join the revolution and come back to the stage. 
Conceived in 1957 and produced in 1964, Stage Sisters was a major suc-
cess for the forty-one-year-old Xie Jin, the PRC’s master ﬁlm director of
communist melodrama.
3 Like his The Number Five of Women’s Basketball
(Nülan Wuhao), of 1957, and Red Detachment of Women(Hongse niangzi jun),
of 1960, Stage Sisters explores the fate of women before and after Libera-
tion. Born and raised in Shangyu, a county adjacent to Shengxian, Xie Jin
was familiar with the lives of Yue opera actresses of the past, and he was
struck by the contrasts in the status and lives of these actresses before and
after Liberation.
4 His two co-screenwriters, Xu Jin and Lin Gu, were also
from Zhejiang, and Xu Jin was, as discussed in previous chapters, a mas-
ter playwright of the Yue opera love drama. In Stage Sisters , as in Xie Jin’s
other two ﬁlms, women’s lives serve as vehicles for communist melodrama.
Such stories typically start with oppressed, exploited, and victimized
women before Liberation and end with “liberated” and happy women, who
are grateful to the Communist Party and fully devoted to the revolution.
The ﬁlm Stage Sisters weaves the story of Yue opera and its actresses into
this master narrative of the communist revolution, which in turn sets the
framework for interpreting Yue opera’s history. It should not be surpris-
ing that the ﬁlm sought to construct and present the history of Yue opera
as part of the melodrama of the communist revolution, for the new state
emphasized the fundamental importance of ideology and propaganda, of
which entertainment was an important aspect. Xie Jin clariﬁed the main
theme of the ﬁlm:
We heard many life stories detailing entertainers’ struggles against the old
ruling class—these were contradictions in life. The dramatic contradiction
in Stage Sisters is manifested in the ideological conﬂict between the two sis-
t e r s... ,  which to a certain degree reﬂects intense and complex class con-
tradictions of the time ....  T his process of intensifying contradiction, in
fact, tells us that people live in a complex class-stratiﬁed society and always
have to choose between two paths—if they do not choose the revolution-
ary path, they will be used by the enemies, and their conduct will make the
enemies happy and their friends grieved....
Local-opera singers in the old society occupied a low position and were
176 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 198 ===

called “tenth-grade humans.” Thus, there is a certain amount of tragic ele-
ments in certain scenes; . . . the mood becomes exalted only after the
appearance of the Party’s leadership in the third chapter.
5
The ﬁlm opens with off-screen  choral singing, alerting the audience to
the ﬁlm’s main theme:
The green water winds its way around the mountains, 
And the sound of opera singing ﬁlls the theatres.
Tears and laughter are commonplace on the stage; 
Who would know there is real-life drama offstage?
6
The scene is set in 1935 and focuses on a traditional stage built on a hill-
side in the eastern Zhejiang countryside , where a women’s Shengxian
opera performance is in progress. In front of the stage, various venders
and gambling groups mingle with audience members, forming a typical
performance scene. Suddenly, the audience is disturbed by a teenage girl
running away from her pursuers, a man and a woman with rope in their
hands. The girl is none other than Zhu Chunhua, escaping the fate of
being a child bride, for she is scheduled to be sexually united with her “child
husband” ( yuan fang) that night. Teacher Xing of the troupe, Yuehong’s
father, pities the girl and takes her in as a student. Before long, the hard-
working Chunhua proves herself to be a good actress, and she and Yue-
hong become stage partners and sworn sisters. A local wealthy landlord
desires the two sisters, but he is soon put off by Chunhua’s strong person -
ality and her overt disgust at his sexual advances. Setting his eyes on Yue-
hong, the landlord conspires with the corrupt police force to storm the
troupe’s performance one day, under the pretext of banning the morally
corrupt women’s opera, and tries to kidnap Yuehong amid the chaos. Chun-
hua ﬁghts off the police and rescues Yuehong but is arrested in the end.
Yuehong’s father uses up his savings to secure Chunhua’s release and, hav-
ing been seriously wounded during the ﬁghting, dies soon thereafter. His
last words to the sisters are “Carry yourself pure and clean; perform
earnestly and honestly.” The owner of the troupe shrewdly sells the sis-
ters into a three-year obligation to a theater owner in Shanghai. For this,
he receives a large sum of money and tells the sisters he has used it all to
pay for the burial of Yuehong’s father. 
In Shanghai, the two sisters soon emerge as rising Yue opera stars, but
they then follow separate paths. Manager Tang, the theater boss, heart-
The Opera as History    177

=== PDF PAGE 199 ===

lessly abandons his lover, Shang Shuihua, the former queen of Yue opera,
now overshadowed by the younger sisters, and takes Yuehong as his new
lover. Humiliated and seeing no future for herself, Shang commits suicide. 
The second part of the ﬁlm depicts a struggle between the CCP-led pro-
gressive forces and the corrupt Nationalist establishment, as manifested in
the struggle between Chunhua and Manager Tang over Yuehong’s fate.
Greatly disturbed that Yuehong has fallen into Tang’s hands and by Shang’s
death, Chunhua adopts progressive ideas about right and wrong, as taught
to her by the reporter Jiang Bo, a CCP underground worker under the lead-
ership of Brother Lin. She decides to stage a production of Lu Xun’s The New
Year’s Sacriﬁcein place of the traditional Yue opera plays, which she now con-
siders obscene and meaningless. In cahoots with the Nationalist Social Affairs
Bureau, which has banned the play, Tang cancels his contract with Chun-
hua’s troupe. Chunhua counters Tang’s effort to ruin her by organizing Yue
opera actresses for a performance that would raise funds for building a the-
ater of their own. The day before the performance, as Chunhua is walking
home, a hooligan jumps out and throws lime powder on her face, damag-
ing her eyes. The Nationalist commissioner Pan and the theater boss Tang
name Yuehong as a coconspirator in an attempt to mislead the public into
believing that the incident was part of a dispute between the two actresses.
The trial is set in a clear-cut good-versus-evil format: Chunhua, the plain-
tiff, and Jiang Bo, who occupies the journalist’s seat during the trial, repre-
sent the good, while the hooligan (the defendant), the Nationalist judges,
Tang, and a Nationalist secret agent seated in the audience represent the
evil. Yuehong, meanwhile, is caught in the crossﬁre; the trial ends in chaos
when Yuehong faints. 
At the end of the ﬁlm, which is set in 1950, Brother Lin and Jiang Bo,
both in army uniform, send Chunhua and her troupe off to participate in
land reform in their hometown as part of an entertainment propaganda team.
On the very stage where Chunhua and Yuehong performed ﬁfteen years ago,
Chunhua stages The White-Haired Girl(Baimao nü), an early Communist clas-
sic from Yan’an that tells the story of how the old society turned a woman
into a ghost and how Liberation restored her. The story line thus parallels
Chunhua’s efforts to restore Yuehong to society, and the ﬁlm ends with Chun-
hua vowing to perform revolutionary drama for the rest of her life.
7
There is thus no doubt that Stage Sisters presents a Party version of the
history of Yue opera and its actresses, a history that meshed closely with
the Party’s history of modern China in general. The director clearly
expressed the ﬁlm’s overt political mission: “Through the vicissitudes of
178 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 200 ===

two stage sisters in a changing theatrical environment, through the differ-
ent life paths Chunhua and Yuehong choose to take, the ﬁlm conveys the
love and hatred of the author and what the author wants the viewer to con-
template.”
8 The ﬁlm’s author wanted to present an uplifting melodrama of
the communist revolution and wanted the viewer to conclude that the his-
tory of Yue opera and its actresses was determined by a grand political strug-
gle in the twentieth century.
How much of the ﬁlm is based on real life and how much is  self-
congratulatory CCP propaganda? The story of Stage Sistersis based on Yuan
Xuefen’s experience during the 1940s, but it also draws liberally on the life
stories of various people surrounding her, most of whom are discussed in
previous chapters: fellow actresses Fu Quanxiang, Ma Zhanghua, and Xiao
Dangui; theater bosses Lu Gendi and Zhang Chunfan; and CCP under-
ground workers Yu Ling and Tong Lijuan. 
Yuan and Fu entered the same all-girls training school in the Shengxian
countryside in 1933, when Yuan was eleven years old and Fu was ten. Each
recalled the other with great fondness, as a companion from school days.
“I was very naughty, and Yuan Xuefen too,” Fu conﬁded. “While everyone
could easily see my troublemaking, not everyone knew how mischievous
Yuan was, because she was more thoughtful even when she was naughty.
We were a good pair.”
9 Yuan recalled with amusement her ﬁrst meeting
with Fu. Yuan’s father would not give Yuan permission to join the opera
school, but a stubborn young Yuan insisted and left home without any lug-
gage. At the school, Yuan met Fu, who was from a nearby village. The two
little girls struck up a conversation, telling each other their stories. When
night fell, however, Yuan found herself without bedding. “Fortunately,” Yuan
said, “Fu offered to let me sleep with her under the same quilt.” 
After three years of study, the girls graduated in 1936; the school became
a troupe and went to Shanghai to try its luck. As indicated in the ﬁlm, the
two friends followed different paths. While Yuan (Zhu Chunhua in the
ﬁlm) resisted the temptations of money and fame and conducted her life
in a manner that was pure and clean, others were caught up in the tumul-
tuous currents of city life. Fu had joined a religious sect with Yuan but could
not adhere to the ascetic lifestyle. In 1941, at age eighteen, she quit the
sect and became the second wife of the owner of the Shenzhou Inn, Zhu
Xiangyun.
10 Five years later, after much hardship, Fu ﬁled for divorce and
ended the marriage.11 The characters Xing Yuehong and Shang Shuihua
also rely on the life stories of Yuan’s stage partner, the famous “lightning
young male impersonator” Ma Zhanghua, and the Yue opera erotic star Xiao
The Opera as History    179

=== PDF PAGE 201 ===

Dangui, both of whom suffered at the hands of theater bosses and died
tragically while embroiled in sex scandals.
The character of Manager Tang is an obvious reference to the theater
bosses Lu Gendi and Zhang Chunfan, who were implicated in the deaths
of Ma Zhanghua and Xiao Dangui respectively and executed by the new
government as counterrevolutionaries in 1951.
12 On the political left, the
character Brother Lin is modeled after the playwright Yu Ling, chair of the
CCP Shanghai underground’s Committee on Culture during the Civil War
and director of Shanghai’s cultural affairs immediately after Liberation in
1949. Another important character, the reporter Jiang Bo, clearly repre-
sents a collective image of lower-level CCP underground workers who facil-
itated Yuan’s staging of Sister Xianglin and supported her in the press during
the union incident. 
Though derived from real-life stories, the ﬁlm politicizes and polarizes
these stories in terms of the struggle between the two rival political par-
ties, whereas the reality, as discussed in previous chapters, was more com-
plicated. For example, Lu Gendi and Zhang Chunfan were not Nationalist
ofﬁcials or afﬁliates, and the man who attacked Yuan Xuefen with a bag of
dung had nothing to do with Zhang Chunfan, nor was the attack ordered
by Nationalist ofﬁcials. The unionists had little political commitment and
acted for personal revenge, although they did take advantage of the gov-
ernment’s anti-leftist attitude. Such complicated everyday local politics are
simpliﬁed in the ﬁlm so that it ﬁts into a grand narrative of the struggle of
good versus evil, or the CCP versus the Nationalists. In fact, the ﬁlm reﬂects
the politicizing practice unfolding in real life in the early PRC period, as
seen in the new government’s execution of Lu and Zhang as class enemies,
ostensibly in response to the request of Yue opera actresses who had held
a public meeting complaining about Zhang’s oppression.
13
Yuan Xuefen, however, endorsed the ﬁlm version of Yue opera history,
or, rather, she helped create this particular version of history. For Yuan’s
career was completely tied to the Party after 1949, and her views inter-
twined with those of the Party to form the basis for an ofﬁcial interpreta-
tion of Yue opera history. During production, the ﬁlm team consulted Yuan
and her cohorts many times and, given Yuan’s artistic and political stature
and her status as the representative of the genre, any ofﬁcial interpretation
of Yue opera history had to privilege Yuan’s career and perspective. 
The revolution reinvented Yuan as a member of the PRC political and
cultural elite, not only occupying high ofﬁcial positions but also enjoying
a personal relationship with Premier Zhou Enlai and his wife Deng
180 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 202 ===

Yingchao. She was described by local ofﬁcials as “someone who had direct
access to top leaders in Beijing” (tongtian). Looking back, Yuan deemed the
performance of Sister Xianglin in 1946 to be the turning point in her life and
career. The play not only introduced her to the CCP before 1949 but also
assured her career success after Liberation. Ideologically correct and artis-
tically meritorious (thanks to Lu Xun’s craftsmanship and Yuan’s thought-
ful rendition), Sister Xianglinshowcased the best of Yue opera’s revolutionary
modern-attire plays and was bound to become a classic under the new gov-
ernment. The play not only exempliﬁed Yuan’s artistic achievement but also
suggested her strong sense of right and wrong even before Liberation. The
play was restaged at three politically signiﬁcant moments: in 1956, on the
twentieth anniversary of Lu Xun’s death; in 1962, on the twentieth anniver-
sary of Mao Zedong’s talk on art and literature in Yan’an; and in 1977, shortly
after the Cultural Revolution and on the forty-ﬁrst anniversary of Lu Xun’s
death. Each restaging of the play in the PRC period reafﬁrmed Yuan’s posi-
tion in Yue opera circles and in national cultural politics. 
In a sense, polarized interpretations of the initial staging of Sister Xianglin
were inevitable given the life-and-death struggle between the two parties
in these decades, and indeed, left-wing intellectuals began to politicize the
show in the wake of the performance. The Nationalist Shanghai Social Affairs
Bureau also became increasingly suspicious that Yuan was a CCP member
and put her under surveillance, while tacitly allowing the unionists to black-
mail and physically attack her. The bureau thought that the ten sisters were
holding their fund-raising performances to raise money for Communist
troops in northern Jiangsu and tried to block the project. Bureau archives
show that, in 1948–49, Wu Kaixian, the head of the bureau, personally mon-
itored the Xuesheng Company, while the bureau ordered the company to
submit its program of performances for approval two weeks in advance.
14
Even in 1996, some Nationalist-afﬁliated Shengxian natives who moved to
Taiwan in 1949 and who are now amateur Yue opera researchers in Taipei
still believed that Yuan was an underground CCP agent.
15
The State and Yue Opera in the Early PRC Period
The ﬁlm’s account of the history of Yue opera and its actresses was also
informed by the complex transformations shaping the genre and the lives
of the actresses in the early PRC period during which the ﬁlm was pro-
duced. Having set itself up as the liberator of the masses, who were exploited
and oppressed by the old ruling class, the CCP was, at least in theory, look-
The Opera as History    181

=== PDF PAGE 203 ===

ing out for the good of the common people, and many CCP leaders were
indeed sympathetic to the needs of disadvantaged, lower-class people.
Unlike workers and peasants, whose status in the revolution was relatively
clearly deﬁned, lower-class actors and especially actresses were regarded
by the CCP with both sympathy and suspicion and identiﬁed as people in
need of both liberation and reformation. Zhou Enlai’s view of Yue opera
actresses, articulated in 1946, clearly reveals this approach:
They [Yue opera actresses] were all children from poor families and became
actresses because there was no other way to make a living. When they became
popular in Shanghai, adoptive mothers and fathers all pursued them, and
evil forces in society surrounded them and corrupted them. A few among
them began to realize their status as the insulted and exploited and thus
wanted to be progressive and learn from progressive spoken dramatists led
by the Party’s underground forces.
16
Zhou accordingly instructed the Shanghai underground to help Yue opera
actresses and draw them into the revolution. 
Li Taicheng, an ofﬁcial at the Shanghai Cultural Affairs Bureau and later
head of the bureau after the Cultural Revolution, had a similar perspective
on the Party’s attitude and policy toward actresses in the early PRC period:
Actresses in the old society were the insulted and injured. In order to make
a living and build a foundation for survival, actresses had to deal with hooli-
gans, theater bosses, young mistresses, and rich concubines. Tong Zhi ling
[a noted Beijing opera actress], for example, had an unusual relationship
with Dai Li [head of the Bureau of Investigation of the Nationalist Com-
mittee on Military Affairs, a notorious fascist organization], but we did not
purge her for that. She was only an actress. If she were not, then it would
have been a political matter. The Communist Party was in fact very sym-
pathetic to these people. It was not that we had to use them to glorify the
image of the Party—there were a lot of actresses with clean personal his-
tories [who were willing to serve the Party].
17
State policy toward popular entertainment in the early and mid-1950s
sought to bring entertainment ﬁrmly under state control through the so-
called three transformations (san gai), which applied to the entertainer, the
structure of the industry, and the stage performance. 
With entertainers, the state sought to educate them in socialist ideas
182 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 204 ===

and make them advocates for the new society. The lowly entertainer of
the past now acquired the status of art worker and thereby not only became
the equal of others in the new society but also was further honored as, in the
state’s term, an “engineer of the soul” who inﬂuenced people with power-
ful arts. In order to showcase this transformation, the state identiﬁed many
ﬁgures similar to Yuan Xuefen in various local operas, such as Ding Shi’e
in Shanghai opera, Chang Xiangyu in Henan clapper opera, Guan Sushuang
in Hebei clapper opera, Hong Xiannü in Guangdong opera, and Mei Lan-
fang and Zhou Xinfang in Beijing opera, to name just a few, and made them
part of the new cultural and political elite.
Within Yue opera, the state-run Shanghai Yue Opera House collected
well-known actresses, such as Fan Ruijuan, Fu Quanxiang, Xu Yulan, and
Wang Wenjuan. Most of them were given political status as members of
the People’s Congress or the Political Consultative Conference. After posi-
tions in Shanghai were allocated, other noted or even less well-known
actresses moved out of Shanghai with the hope of acquiring similar status
in other cities. In 1954, Zhu Shuizhao and her Yunhua Company became
the Nanjing City Yue Opera Company,
18 and Gao Jianlin and her com-
pany settled in Xi’an,19 while in 1959, Yin Guifang and her Fanghua Com-
pany relocated to Fuzhou. 20 The transformation of such actresses into
members of state elites raised the status of entertainers in general and encour-
aged others to follow the Party as well.
In effecting structural transformation of the entertainment industry, the
state sought to replace the old market-based structure with a centrally planned
popular culture and economy. In Shanghai, the new entertainment indus-
try was organized in tiers, with a few state theaters directly under the cen-
tral government ( guojia juyuan) at the top, followed by local state-owned
institutions under provincial or municipal governments (guoying jutuan), state-
run troupes collectively owned by the employees (xin guoying jutuan), and
private troupes receiving state aid (minban gongzhu jutuan). The theaters were
also placed under state ownership and tied loosely to various performance
units. The government ﬁrst created four state-owned institutions in major
native-opera genres in the city: the Shanghai Yue Opera House, with the
status of a state theater; the Shanghai Beijing Opera House; the Shanghai
People’s Shanghai Opera Company; and the Shanghai People’s Huai Opera
Company.
21 These state-owned companies were meant to showcase the best
of each genre and lead opera reform in general. Before the Cultural Revo-
lution, the ﬁeld of popular entertainment included a planned entertainment
culture represented by state-owned institutions and their productions along
The Opera as History    183

=== PDF PAGE 205 ===

with the market-oriented popular entertainment provided by the collectively
owned troupes. Employees in state-run institutions were on the government
payroll and enjoyed a stable monthly salary and beneﬁts, while those under
collective ownership relied on the market value of their performances.
Depending on the market and the quality of each troupe’s performances,
some actresses could enjoy a very good income, much better than those on
the state payroll, while others had to rely on government-subsidized health
care and welfare beneﬁts when box ofﬁce revenues were low.
22 In the mid-
1950s, the government spent a considerable amount of money to safeguard
the welfare of entertainers, providing everything from unemployment and
health beneﬁts to winter clothing and quilts.
23 At the same time, the state
not only directly controlled the productions of state-owned companies but
also asserted inﬂuence on collectively owned troupes by inserting adminis-
trators and Party cells in these troupes. Thus, before 1949, entertainers were
largely on their own, and their livelihood depended on their ability to draw
customers; after 1949, the state took responsibility for both the content of
the production and the entertainers’ livelihoods.
24
Along with transforming the entertainer and the industry, the state sought
to transform stage productions. According to Li Taicheng: “After Libera-
tion, the administration exercised complete leadership over art and enter-
tainment and did away with all social [market] inﬂuences.”
25 Although the
extent to which government control of entertainment was in fact “com-
plete” is an open question, there is no doubt that during the early PRC
period, state intervention had a great impact on stage performances as a
whole. For the state, popular entertainment was to be reformed, along with
the entertainer, so that it could educate the people with socialist ideas. 
The new state took a populist stance toward local operas, promoting them
as China’s native folk arts and sending playwrights, directors, and composers
as well as political leaders to native-opera troupes to help develop politi-
cally correct productions with high artistic values. While providing unprece-
dented intellectual, media, and ﬁnancial support to local operas, and hence
helping to raise their artistic sophistication to a new level, state intervention
limited possibilities for exploring various subjects and styles. As the self-
designated heir to the New Culture Movement, the state quickly banned
plays it deemed morally corrupt or politically incorrect, including ghost
horror stories and erotic plays such as the Yue opera Widow Ma’s Innand the
Beijing opera Break Open the Cofﬁn.
26 At the same time, it elevated and pro-
moted revolutionary modern-attire plays conveying the Party line and prop-
agating state policies on current affairs. 
184 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 206 ===

The state, however, was unsure about how to treat love drama. On the
one hand, the new state sanctioned love drama with its strong pro-women
position, which countered feudal remnants such as gender discrimination,
arranged marriage, and the exploitation of women in the traditional family
system. The constitution gave women rights equal to those of men, and in
1950, for the ﬁrst time in Chinese history, the Marriage Law banned polyg -
amy and granted women equal rights to family property and to divorce. The
propaganda campaign launched in 1953 to promote the new law identiﬁed
free love, as opposed to traditional arranged marriage, and women’s liber-
ation in general as fundamental components of China’s socialist culture and
the basis for forging a new socialist citizenry. The state’s promotion of gen-
der equality and free marriage gave love drama in Yue opera, and in popu-
lar entertainment overall, a great boost, as it granted political legitimacy to
an already popular theatrical subgenre. On the other hand, the ofﬁcially
endorsed form of revolutionary heroism left no room for indulgence in the
petty, bourgeois kind of love sentiment. Audiences, however, continued to
support love drama and were uninterested in the new revolutionary plays.
As revolutionary plays lacked popularity and erotic plays were banned, love
drama thrived.
Yue opera love drama peaked both artistically and in popularity in the
1950s and early 1960s, a period that witnessed the production of several
Yue opera masterpieces, including Tale of the Western Chamberand Dream of the
Red Chamber. Just as the transformation of The Butterﬂy Loversduring the Repub-
lican period exempliﬁes the way in which folk traditions nurtured the opera’s
growth, so the staging of Tale of the Western Chamberand Dream of the Red Cham-
ber shows how a mature Yue opera absorbed the cream of  tradi tional liter-
ature and created theatrical masterpieces of love in the complex context
of the early PRC period.
The Shanghai Yue Opera House’s new rendition of Tale of the Western Cham-
ber illustrates this process. Adapted from Wang Shifu’s famous miscellany-
opera play of the same title, the Yue opera Tale of the Western Chamberis a tragic
love story about a talented young scholar, Zhang Gong, and Cui Ying ying,
the beautiful daughter of a late prime minister. The play was ﬁrst produced
in 1953 by order of Premier Zhou Enlai to entertain the visiting North Korean
president, Kim Il-Sung, upon the signing of the Sino-Korean Treaty.
27 In the
1955 revision of the play, Yuan Xuefen depicted the character of Cui Ying -
ying as a sensitive, lovesick maiden torn between her upbringing, with its
Confucian notions of women’s propriety, and her desire for love. Although
Yingying’s love for Zhang Gong eventually overcomes the constraints of
The Opera as History    185

=== PDF PAGE 207 ===

feudal morality, and the union of the two lovers deﬁes feudal authority,
their subsequent forced separation attests to the evils of feudalism.28
During the Qing dynasty, Tale of the Western Chamber was banned as an
“erotic play” (yin xi), and in the Republican period, various local operas often
performed it as such. It is said that Zhang Gong, as played by some rural
or low-level itinerary troupes, extended his arm from behind the curtained
bed, swinging egg whites on his ﬁngers, a gesture considered extremely erotic
at the time.
29 Other versions, including those in women’s Yue opera and
Beijing opera, had the character Hongniang, Yingying’s maid, act out erotic
gestures from her place outside the room where Cui Yingying and Zhang
Gong are supposedly making love.
30 In the 1953 and 1955 Yue opera pro-
ductions, all the explicit sexual episodes were eliminated, and romantic love
governed the narrative. The strong subtext of the young lovers’ erotic desire
186 The Opera as History
5.2  ”Farewell,” the last scene in Tale of the Western Chamber, with Zhu Dongyun 
as Cui Yingying (second left) and Cao Yindi as Zhang Gong (second right), 1960s. 
First produced in the early 1950s by the Shanghai Yue Opera House, the play 
has become a classic, staged by every generation of Yue opera actresses. 
(Courtesy of Shanghai Yue Opera House)

=== PDF PAGE 208 ===

5.3  Fang Yafen as Cui Yingying (left) and Zhang Yongmei as Hongniang 
in Tale of the Western Chamber, 1992. (Courtesy of Shanghai Yue Opera House)

=== PDF PAGE 209 ===

for each other was veiled by the actresses’ skillful depiction of the charac-
ters’ emotional development (see ﬁgs. 5.2, 5.3).31
The state used Yue opera love drama to represent the achievements of
Chinese native opera in the international community. Yue opera was the
ﬁrst native opera to be performed internationally. At the Geneva Con-
vention in 1953, Premier Zhou Enlai entertained foreign diplomats and jour-
nalists with the new Yue opera color ﬁlm The Butterﬂy Lovers. In 1955, the
Shanghai Yue Opera House, touring as the Chinese Yue Opera Troupe,
performed two Yue opera masterpieces, The Butterﬂy Loversand Tale of the West-
ern Chamber, in the German Democratic Republic and the Soviet Union.
32
These two plays and, after 1958, Dream of the Red Chamber, became interna-
tionally known through frequent performances overseas and at home for
foreign guests. The Shanghai Yue Opera House became an important cul-
tural ambassador for the PRC state. In 1962 and 1963, when a number of
Yue opera plays were made into color ﬁlms and screened nationwide and
internationally, Yue opera’s inﬂuence reached new heights. As the Yue opera
playwright Cheng Rong remarked:
Yue opera had always had low status and was not worthy of being talked
about. As a Yue opera playwright, Xu Jin could not even ﬁnd a wife before
Liberation. He was married after Liberation. At that time [in the 1940s], we
were all embarrassed to tell people that we were doing Yue opera. I thus even-
tually cut off communication with my former classmates, because they could
not understand why I became involved in Yue opera—as if I were no good.
Only after Liberation did Yue opera gain high esteem and come to be per-
formed nationwide and even overseas, representing our country.
33
Perhaps exaggerating somewhat, Cheng Rong nonetheless attested to
the fact that Yue opera was at its political and artistic zenith during the
1950s and early 1960s. Although Yue opera had already been prominent
in Shanghai’s entertainment market before 1949, the new state acknowl-
edged Yue opera’s artistic achievements and further raised its status by mak-
ing it into a national theater, widely known as China’s second-largest native
opera, second only to Beijing opera.
Most actresses felt optimistic and ﬁnancially more secure under the new
government. Wu Xiaolou, for example, had entered an all-girls opera school
in 1934, when she was around nine years old, and joined the Shanghai Yue
Opera House as a leading actress playing elderly male roles after Liberation.
The youngest among the Yue opera ten sisters, she was enthusiastic about
188 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 210 ===

the revolution, and being part of the state-run Shanghai Yue Opera House
was her way of joining the revolution. She willingly took a salary cut and
never expected to receive such generous ﬁnancial beneﬁts in her retirement:
Comparing the situations of actresses in the old and new societies, actresses
now enjoy a higher political status and [level of] human dignity. Although
we were very popular among audiences, we had no political status and were
looked down upon by others. After Liberation, party leaders treated us so
nicely, nicer than my own father. Moreover, when I joined the state-run insti-
tution, I was prepared to receive no salary. In the end, however, I received
a monthly salary of three hundred yuan, plus free health care. Now, my retire-
ment pension is more than one thousand a month plus free health care. I can
be an in-patient whenever necessary. In the old society, I watched old Yue
opera teachers dying in the streets.
34
Wu’s sentiment was shared by other elderly actors and actresses. The
couple Zhang Rongbiao and Zhang Yanqiu, Yue opera performers in the
1930s, were comfortable, though not rich, living in retirement on govern-
ment money in their hometown of Chongren, Shengxian, in 1995. Wu also
alluded to another beneﬁt Liberation brought to young actresses: they no
longer had to deal with hooligans, theater bosses, and unscrupulous men
trying to take advantage of them.
Not everyone, however, was initially as enthusiastic as Wu about the
new government and state-run institutions and missed out on what the
state had to offer. Jia Guilian, a member of the Yulan Company, led by Xu
Yulan, refused to participate when Xu merged the company with the People’s
Liberation Army in Beijing in 1952; this was yet another way of joining
the revolution and becoming nationalized. After two years of service, the
Yulan Company was sent back to Shanghai and joined the Shanghai Yue
Opera House. Zhou Baokui, who had spent her entire career with the Yulan
Company, commented in 1996 that Jia had “calculated badly” and now
lacked a stable salary and free health care.
35 This may not have been impor-
tant at the time, as popular young actresses could probably make at least
as much as the income offered by the state. But in the long run, those on
the state’s payroll could count on secure employment and better beneﬁts,
not to mention the status of being members of a national opera house.
The ﬁlm Stage Sisters, made during this so-called golden age of Yue opera,
reﬂected these positive changes in the status of Yue opera and the lives
of its actresses. Indeed, it is indisputable that the communist revolution
The Opera as History    189

=== PDF PAGE 211 ===

raised the status of local operas and beneﬁted Yue opera actresses and enter-
tainers in general by absorbing some entertainers into a national political
and cultural elite while providing others with ﬁnancial security and social
standing. 
Problems with Cinema’s Master Narrative
Were there no problems, then, with Stage Sisters’ communist melodrama and
the polarization of good and evil manifested in its dichotomized repre-
sentations of the CCP versus the Nationalist Party and of pre-Liberation
society versus post-Liberation society? One problem with communist
melodrama is that it denies agency to the people the CCP claims to have
liberated from the evils of the Nationalists. It attributes agency only to the
two battling forces, making objects of everyone caught between the two.
In this way, it construes the relationship between the Party and Yue opera
actresses as one between the liberator and the liberated and thus allows
the Party to take full credit for the actresses’ upward mobility. The melo-
drama therefore disregards the subjectivity of the people who created Yue
opera as a popular phenomenon—their views and the strategies they
adopted or forged in order to get through life. One striking example of
this oversight involves the character Xing Yuehong, who is presented as a
typically weak and misled woman, destroyed by evil forces and rescued
only because of the triumph of good forces. By casting her as such a pathetic
creature, the ﬁlm does not give her credit for resistance or self-salvation.
In real life, however, Fu Quanxiang, on whom the character is partially based,
divorced her ﬁrst husband entirely of her own volition. Like Fu, many other
actresses managed to overcome adversity, one way or another, without the
Party’s help.
Signiﬁcantly, the ﬁrst draft of the ﬁlm, titled Detailed Outlines, has a some-
what less clear-cut narrative and makes better sense of Yuehong’s choices.
Before taking his last breath, Yuehong’s father tells her to ﬁnd a good hus-
band and quit this difﬁcult acting vocation. Later on, disappointed in her
marriage to Manager Tang, Yuehong returns to acting and tries to abort
her pregnancy in order to free herself of Tang’s control. At a crucial moment,
Yuehong bravely, and also shrewdly, rescues Chunhua from the hands of
Nationalist agents and helps make the fund-raising performance a success.
The sisters are thus reconciled, and Yuehong joins the progressive forces
before Liberation.
36 This early version of Yuehong’s marriage to Tang reﬂects
the ideals and life strategies common among Yue opera actresses at the time,
190 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 212 ===

and in portraying Yuehong’s resistance to Tang, after she realizes the mar-
riage was a mistake, it at least allows her some agency. After a subsequent
editorial process that sought to “deepen the main theme” and “reﬁne the
plot line,” however, Yuehong’s marriage to Tang is recast as a categorical
mistake, and the ﬁnal production denied Yuehong any agency at all.
37
Even the main character, Zhu Chunhua, is presented as a person who
would be nothing without the Party. Chunhua’s protests to Tang upon Shang
Shuihua’s death only help Tang boost his public image, while she is
depicted as at her wit’s end in ﬁghting the dark forces. It is the left-wing
journalist Jiang Bo who thereafter supports and guides Chunhua step by
step, introducing her to Lu Xun’s story about Sister Xianglin, writing arti-
cles supporting her in the news media, and guiding her through the com-
plex courtroom battle. At the same time, the ﬁlm tries to make clear that
Chunhua’s, or Yuan’s, struggle would not have had a chance of success were
it not for Liberation. As Jiang Bo tells Chunhua when the actresses are work-
ing on the fund-raising project for their own theater: “The Xinhu Theater
is a small stage, and society is a large theater. There is a big boss behind
Manager Tang, and behind the big boss there is the American. These people
control the large theater....  I f  s ociety remains the same and the big boss
remains in control, we cannot possibly have our own theater.”
38 Liberation
becomes the only solution to all of the problems facing the actresses, ren-
dering their spontaneous activities trivial. 
In real life, Yuan Xuefen displayed an exceptionally strong will and stub-
bornly pursued her own agenda of making Yue opera and its actresses both
modern and respectable. Yuan not only followed a lifestyle based on qing-
bai but also performed that virtue onstage. From the time of her youth, Yuan
was reluctant to participate in what she considered lighthearted and
obscene plays and chose instead to specialize in the roles of serious
women. In 1942, when she started the New Yue Opera reform movement,
she made it a principle not to sing at private parties. Chang tanghui, the prac-
tice of performing for rich, powerful patrons in their homes, was a tradi-
tion from imperial times and continued into the Republican period. For many
popular entertainers, chang tanghuicould be an important source of income,
a way of exchanging favors with the host or go-between, and a chance to
establish or renew ties with upper-class patrons. Under the inﬂuence of
the Republican rhetoric of theatrical reform, and inspired by the model
intellectual actors in ﬁlm and spoken drama, some entertainers, such as Yuan
Xuefen, began to see the practice as feudalistic and humiliating, contrary
to their desired new status as art workers. Even when Madame Chiang Kai-
The Opera as History    191

=== PDF PAGE 213 ===

shek (Song Meiling) invited Yuan in 1946 to perform at her house, Yuan
declined, saying that Madame Chiang could see her performance in a the-
ater; the invitation had come through Wang Xiaolai, former president of
the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce and perhaps the most powerful Sheng-
xian native in Shanghai. In Yuan’s mind, her decision was not directed toward
Madame Chiang Kai-shek but was a matter of principle and consistency
in building her self-esteem and character.
39 Left-wing journalists found only
political value in Yuan’s action. The CCP-controlled newspaper United Evening
News reported the episode, implicitly politicizing Yuan’s refusal.40 Three
decades later, Yuan’s biography presented this small episode as evidence
of her political choice.
41
While communist revolution was not her agenda, to some extent because
she had no idea what communism was at the time, some of her under-
takings inadvertently coincided with the interests of the left, such as her
staging of Sister Xianglin and her refusal to be involved with the Yue Opera
Workers’ Union, which was sanctioned by the Nationalist Social Affairs
Bureau. By making these two incidents the center of the Yue opera story,
however, the ﬁlm neglects the most important development of the time,
one initiated entirely by the actresses themselves, namely the New Yue
Opera reforms of which Sister Xianglin was a product. What mattered to
Yuan at the time was not her “discovery of the Party,” as she never dis-
covered the Party until after Liberation, but access to the mainstream media
and a powerful left-wing social network.
42 Because of Sister Xianglin, Yue
opera made headlines in mainstream newspapers for the ﬁrst time in its
history, initiating a continuous stream of reportage about its reforms and
its actresses over the next few years; coverage of Yue opera became a  regu -
lar feature, making Yuan Xuefen a positive public ﬁgure in the mainstream
press. 
Sister Xianglin also introduced Yuan Xuefen and other Yue opera actresses
to women’s activist groups, members of the left-wing cultural elite, and high-
level CCP Shanghai underground leaders. Yuan Xuefen established rela-
tionships with such inﬂuential individuals as Xu Guangping, Tian Han, and
Yu Ling as well as with the young intellectuals Liao Lin, Mei Duo, and Tong
Lijuan. This social network opened up a new world for Yuan and the other
actresses. Yuan Xuefen and Yin Guifang were invited to attend seminars
and tea parties for youth and women organized by Xu Guangping and
 performed twice for fund-raising events beneﬁting the Chinese Children’s
Foundation (Zhongguo Fuli Hui) sponsored by Madame Sun Yat-sen
(Song Qingling). Yuan and the Xuesheng Company also participated in
192 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 214 ===

various leftist-sponsored activities. The Xuesheng Company, for example,
sent representatives to the memorial conference for Tao Xingzhi, a well-
known left-wing intellectual, and to the public memorial service for Wen
Yiduo and Li Gongpu, both of whom had been assassinated by National-
ist special agents in 1946.
43 By participating in these functions, and pro-
viding popular material for left-wing media, Yue opera actresses also
supported the left wing and the CCP underground, albeit unknowingly.
The relationship between Yue opera actresses and the CCP was mutually
beneﬁcial and required continual negotiation after 1949. In any case, it was
hardly a relationship between a liberator on one side and those waiting to
be liberated on the other.
The ﬁlm’s communist melodrama also presents a one-sided view of how
Liberation beneﬁted Yue opera and its actresses, neglecting any possible
negative effect the post-Liberation reform process had on the opera. After
the government ﬁnished restructuring the entertainment system in 1958,
it turned its focus to productions that would reﬂect the heroism and patri-
otism of the working people in building socialism during the Great Leap
Forward. From 1958 onward, Yue opera was under great pressure to change
the emphasis of its repertoire from costume love dramas to revolutionary
modern-attire plays. Numerous plays about heroic struggles against the
Nationalists and the Japanese invaders in the past and about ongoing class
struggles were hastily staged to help disseminate government propaganda
for political campaigns; these productions, however, attracted few view-
ers and usually ended after only a few performances.
44 The situation became
increasingly tense when Mao himself delivered two speeches on culture,
at the end of 1963 and in mid-1964. Mao’s instructions were echoed by
the radical leftist Zhang Chunqiao, then head of the CCP Shanghai Min-
istry of Propaganda, who instructed the art and entertainment industries
to concentrate on the momentous achievements of the thirteen years since
Liberation. As Li Taicheng, then deputy head of the Shanghai Cultural
Affairs Bureau, recalled:
We were so afraid when we heard of Chairman Mao’s two instructions in
1963 and 1964. Mao also commented [on another occasion] on a report
sent to him about the storytelling campaign that Beijing opera is all about
emperors, kings, generals, and ministers, while Yue opera is all about scholar-
b e a u t y  s t o r i e s ....  B e c ause of Mao’s instructions, the CCP Ministry of Prop-
aganda was a little nervous, and Zhang Chunqiao thus declared “ten great
merits for focusing on the thirteen years since Liberation.”. . . Mao’s instruc-
The Opera as History    193

=== PDF PAGE 215 ===

tions were [issued in] only a few sentences, but the wind began to blow.
Wind coming from nowhere could become so strong that it would shake
heaven and earth.
45
In 1964, the recently released, instantly popular Yue opera ﬁlm Dream of
the Red Chamber was quietly recalled, signaling the end of good fortune for
love drama and anticipating the great disaster soon to come. In fact, an
increasingly radical state cultural policy had already damaged the popu-
lar-culture market. Even before the Cultural Revolution, most state-owned
institutions, including the Shanghai Beijing Opera House, the Shanghai
People’s Shanghai Opera Company, the Shanghai People’s Huai Opera
Company, and major theaters, had been running deﬁcits for several years,
despite the tax exemption they received for staging modern-attire revolu-
tionary plays.
46 The Shanghai Yue Opera House was perhaps the only state-
owned institution that did not lose money, because of revenues from several
popular Yue opera movies made during the 1950s and early 1960s. It, too,
was losing money on stage performances of modern-attire revolutionary
plays, and revenues from its limited staging of love dramas, with special
permission from the Cultural Affairs Bureau, could not make up for the
losses. The overall market for popular entertainment was shrinking.
In short, just as the Party assumed the role of liberator of the people,
so it made itself a designer of culture, directing artists and audiences onto
what it considered to be the right path. This elitist attitude again blinded
the Party to the crucial roles artist agency and audience reception played
in cultural development. The state’s privileging of the communist revolu-
tion in Stage Sisters obscured many other forces at work in the history of
Yue opera. The rise of women’s Yue opera and its actresses was a ramiﬁ-
 cation of several modern processes: the actresses’ struggle for full social
 status, the formation of an urban bourgeois culture with a strong female
component, and an urban-based theatrical reform in the context of nation-
building rhetoric. The social, political, and economic upheaval that
occurred from the early PRC period through the Cultural Revolution dras-
tically altered Shanghai’s bourgeois modernity, which had supported Yue
opera’s success, and the Cultural Revolution was the coup de grâce. 
The Storm
Stage Sisters , along with the 1963 ﬁlms The Second Month in Early Spring
(Zaochun eryue), directed by Xie Tieli, and Jiangnan in the Northern Country
194 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 216 ===

(Beiguo Jiangnan), directed by Shen Fu, had become an object of criticism
even before its 1965 release. According to the Party’s leftist radicals, led
by Mao and his wife Jiang Qing, these ﬁlms propagated not the heroic rev-
olutionary spirit but bourgeois humanism, which had its roots in the bour-
geois orientation of the early leftist ﬁlms produced in Shanghai in the 1930s.
Stage Sisters was thus a “poisonous weed” ( ducao) threatening the garden of
socialist art and entertainment with its bourgeois sentimentality, as expressed
in the two sisters’ deep feelings for each other. Mao and Jiang Qing used
such cultural criticism to weaken rivals within the Party who were allied
with Liu Shaoqi, then PRC president, who had been in charge of the Party’s
underground work in large cities in the 1930s and 1940s. Stage Sisters, they
claimed, was guilty of propagating the wrong line, one that emphasized
underground work, as opposed to Mao’s correct line of building revolu-
tion in the countryside in order to surround and ﬁnally take over the bour-
geois cities.
47
These charges against Stage Sisters reﬂect an important division in
approaches within the CCP: the Maoist rural-based, tough proletarian
approach versus the urban-oriented, bourgeoisie-friendly approach advo-
cated by Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping after the founding of the People’s
Republic of China. Though it had its roots in the 1930s, when Mao emerged
victorious from intraparty struggles and the Nationalists’ military campaign
to wipe out the CCP, this division reemerged in the 1950s; it became increas-
ingly clear in the early 1960s in the wake of the great famine that resulted
from the Great Leap Forward. Mao had been forced to resign as president
of the state in 1962, when the national economy hit rock bottom and twenty
million to thirty million people died of starvation. Liu Shaoqi took over
and consolidated ongoing economic adjustment policies, which were later
labeled capitalistic by hardcore Maoists. On the cultural front, Liu’s new
approach encouraged the production of numerous sentimental revolutionary
melodramas, including the three ﬁlms noted above. Yet, as the economy
was recovering, Mao was gathering his forces. He noted in his two direc-
tives on cultural affairs issued in late 1963 and mid-1964:
There are a lot of problems that involve a lot of people in the various art
forms—local operas, storytelling, music, painting, dance, ﬁlm, poetry, and
literature. Socialist reform has achieved very little in many institutions.
The majority of [artistic] associations and their publications (it is said a
few are good) basically have not followed the Party’s policy over the past
ﬁfteen years. They have behaved like high ofﬁcials and not tried to get close
The Opera as History    195

=== PDF PAGE 217 ===

to the workers, peasants, and soldiers so as to reﬂect socialist revolution and
construction [in their arts]. In recent years, they have even fallen to the edge
of revisionism.
48
The rhetorical campaign Mao and his allies waged against certain ﬁlms
and operas between 1963 and 1965 was followed by the campaign criti-
cizing the Beijing opera play Hairui Dismissed from Ofﬁce (Hairui baguan),
penned by the historian Wu Han, which became the prelude to the Cul-
tural Revolution.
49
During the Cultural Revolution, leftist radicals purged the entertainment
industry of all “feudal” and “bourgeois” productions, leaving a handful of
thoroughly revolutionary ﬁlms and operas, mostly about heroes and hero-
ines led by Mao in armed struggles against the Nationalists and Japanese
invaders in the 1930s and 1940s. The radical state now asserted nearly com-
plete control over cultural production and consumption, and all it could
offer in performance art were the ten so-called model operas, which fea-
tured the same dry narratives of the heroic communist revolution. Yue opera
was hard hit, as it focused on the bourgeois love stories and the feudal cos-
tume plays that ran counter to proletarian arts. Between 1966 and 1971,
almost all Yue opera companies in Shanghai were disbanded, properties
were disposed of, and artists were sent to labor in the countryside and fac-
tories or otherwise devoted themselves entirely to political activities. After
President Richard Nixon’s visit to China and the signing of the Shanghai
Communiqué in 1972, the state slightly loosened its policy toward local
operas. In 1973, the Shanghai Yue Opera House was reorganized into the
Shanghai Yue Opera Company and staged its ﬁrst public performance of
a modern-attire revolutionary play, Song of the Dragon River(Longjiang song),
copied from the model Beijing opera. Thus, less than a handful of gender-
straight modern-attire revolutionary plays constituted the only Yue opera
performances during the entire decade of the Cultural Revolution.
50 The
damage done to Yue opera was so severe that the genre never recovered,
except for a short period following the end of the Cultural Revolution. 
Yuan Xuefen and many other well-known actresses were politically per-
secuted and physically tortured by the young rebels in the Shanghai Yue
Opera House during the Cultural Revolution. In 1977, having barely sur-
vived, Yuan and the Shanghai Yue Opera House once again staged Sister
Xianglin. At this moment of rehabilitation, Yuan reﬂected on her sufferings
during the Cultural Revolution and waxed nostalgic about the passage of
time. Sensing that this might be her last performance as Sister Xianglin,
196 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 218 ===

she wrote an essay recalling her ﬁrst performance of the play thirty-two
years before:
At that time, I was young and naive, having never read Marxist-Leninist works.
I did not comprehend the greatness of Lu Xun and had only vague feelings
about the things I liked and disliked in society. I simply felt sympathetic to
Sister Xianglin’s misfortune. I had seen and was familiar with female ﬁgures
like the character Sister Xianglin. I just wanted to adapt The New Year’s Sac-
riﬁce for the stage....
The performance attracted considerable attention. The Nationalist reac-
tionaries dispatched secret service agents to tail me, and they assaulted me
with dung, libel, and other means. Reactionary newspapers threatened that
if I “turned to the left, there would be no way out.” But progressive forces
of the time supported me and encouraged me, pointing out that the mis-
fortune of Sister Xianglin was not simply a question of who killed her but a
criticism of the social system. I then began to understand that the distress
of Sister Xianglin in Lu Xun’s story condemned the reactionary social sys-
tem, the foundation of the old society. This theory enabled me to see the
social origin of Sister Xianglin’s tragedy. From then on, Sister Xianglin led me
to progressivism and revolution.
51
Yuan blamed the Nationalists for all her adversities in the three years before
Liberation and did not doubt that the CCP underground supported her
otherwise lonely struggle against all odds. Two Party scholars, Zhang Lihui
and Gao Yilong, later elaborated on this theme in their 1984 biography of
Yuan: 
After the staging of Sister Xianglin, progressive forces and reactionary forces
both paid attention to Yuan Xuefen and the Xuesheng Company. During
those turbulent and confusing days, the inevitable questions [Yuan and other
actresses] faced were: Which path to take? And whom to follow?
52
Yuan’s statement and her biography are in line with the communist mas-
ter narrative of Yue opera’s history as featured in Xie Jin’s ﬁlm. At this time
Yue opera was enjoying a huge but short-lived revival. The Yue opera ﬁlm
Dream of the Red Chamber was released in 1978 and instantly broke box ofﬁce
records across the nation, and the wide-screen color ﬁlm of Sister Xiang lin
attracted numerous viewers throughout the nation and in Hong Kong. In
Shanghai, enthusiastic spectators crowded theaters to see Yue opera clas-
The Opera as History    197

=== PDF PAGE 219 ===

sic love dramas. While the Shanghai Yue Opera House regained its pres-
tigious title, several district-level state-owned Yue opera companies also
revived. Then, during the late 1980s, Yue opera’s market began to shrink,
and the genre slid into the same desperate position as other local operas
that had long been relying on government subsidies. The reason for this
negative change, according to several Yue opera practitioners and schol-
ars, was the lack of a new generation of operagoers due to the disruptions
caused by the Cultural Revolution.
53 It seemed to many that the new state
brought Yue opera to its glorious peak only to destroy it. When asked to
assess the relationship between state control and the fate of Yue opera, vet-
eran Yue opera director and reformer Han Yi responded:
Before Liberation, there were many inadequacies in terms of funding, the
quality of personnel, and internal organization. The most difﬁcult problem
was the lack of funding for artistic experimentation. After Liberation and
with the state’s support, artistic accomplishments reached to a new height,
only to stagnate because artistic considerations had to be subordinated to
bureaucracy and the Party’s orders....  I t  i s  p ossible that Yue opera would
be better off today if not for Liberation and the Cultural Revolution.
54
Yue opera’s downturn in the 1980s thus invited Yue opera people to reassess
the genre’s relationship with the communist revolution and to reﬂect on
their hopes for the opera’s renewal.
The New Context of the Post-revolution Era
After Mao’s death, China’s national objectives underwent dramatic changes.
The landmark Third Plenary Session of the CCP Tenth Central Com-
mittee, held at the end of 1979, passed a resolution to stop considering
“class struggle” the center of the Party’s platform and to shift its focus to
“socialist modernization.”
55 The Party began to reinstate market-driven
economies, slowly moved away from the Soviet model of a planned econ-
omy, and allowed a capitalist economy to coexist with socialism. In 1980,
the CCP government established four Special Economic  Zones—Shenzhen,
Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen—in which to develop a capitalist economy.
In 1984, another fourteen large coastal cities, including Shanghai and Tian-
jin, were opened to foreign investment.
56 In 1992, during Deng Xiaoping’s
southern tour to Guangdong and Shanghai, his famous speeches ﬁnally crys-
tallized the Party’s determination to focus on economic development and
198 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 220 ===

the policy of “opening and reform.” 57 Deng believed that China “should
borrow and use all those advanced economic models that reﬂect the laws
of modern mass production developed by countries around the world includ-
ing developed capitalist countries.”
58 His methodology blurred the line
between socialism and capitalism and freed the government to use all avail-
able means for China’s development. Deng’s famous “cat philosophy”—
”White cat or black cat, as long as it can catch the mouse, it is a good
cat”—became the motto of the reform era, and the Maoist ideology and
politics of class struggle crumbled.
Under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping and his successor, Jiang Zemin,
economic development became the Party’s focus, and ideology was assigned
a supporting role. Reinstating a market economy was key not only for eco-
nomic stimulation in general but also for cultural production. As the state
now prioritized putting money into people’s pockets over reforming their
souls, artists and entertainers were released from their obligation to assist
the state in this endeavor and could explore artistic themes that inspired
them, as long as they posed no explicit challenge to the CCP leadership.
The 1980s and 1990s witnessed the emergence of a lively entertainment
market characterized by a diversity of cultural activities, including revived
native-opera and story-singing performances, movies and television dra-
mas directed by veterans and new generations of Chinese directors, and
new cultural forms inﬂuenced by a globalized mass culture, such as rock
and roll, karaoke and dance halls, and foreign ﬁlms.
The entertainment market in the reform era differed from that of the pre-
vious decades in two ways. First, unlike during the early PRC period and
the Cultural Revolution, productions featuring revolutionary and politically
correct patriotic narratives, considered “main melody” (zhu xuanlü) works by
the Party, no longer dominated; instead, along with main-melody produc-
tions, which represented the ofﬁcial ideology, the Party allowed the devel-
opment of a diverse cultural market. Second, the later post-Mao years
witnessed a general decline in “traditional” entertainment forms, such as ﬁlm,
native operas, and story-singing, following a brief boom when the enter-
tainment market returned, and the rise of new cultural forms inﬂuenced by
globalized mass entertainment that appeals to younger consumers. Accord-
ing to Li Taicheng, head of the Shanghai Cultural Affairs Bureau from 1977
to the mid-1980s: 
From the Bureau for Public Health, I was asked [by the Party] to go back
and take charge of the Shanghai Cultural Affairs Bureau on January 10, 1977 .
The Opera as History    199

=== PDF PAGE 221 ===

I began by restoring some native-opera troupes, and Yue opera resumed per-
formances initially with modern-attire plays, such as Spring Tide [(Sanyue
chunchao), of 1978] and Yang Kaihui [(Zhonghun qu), of 1977]. By the 1978
Chinese New Year, tickets for native-opera and story-singing performances
were no longer as coveted as before. Suzhou story-singing was the ﬁrst to
decline in popularity, because it was too slow and its audience was aging.
There were still people attending shows in the daytime, but few showed
up for the evening performances. On the other hand, libraries were full of
people. In the latter half of 1978, Beijing opera took its downhill turn. But
Yue opera, comic shows, and Shanghai opera were still popular. After 1979,
many genres lost their appeal, including Yue opera. But dance and comic
shows remained pretty popular. It is clear that there was a generational
change in the audiences. Comedy became popular, ﬁlm declined, TV drama
entered people’s homes, and newspapers became extremely popular. Later,
pop songs, karaoke, dance halls, and television boomed, and native operas
crashed.
59
In Shanghai, although native operas no longer dominated the entertain-
ment market, along with movies, as they had before, they still managed
to survive, thanks in part to government subsidies that helped sustain a
few state-owned institutions, including the Shanghai Yue Opera House,
the Shanghai Beijing Opera House, the Shanghai Shanghai Opera House,
the Shanghai Huai Opera Company, and the Shanghai Kun Opera Com-
pany. Facing increasing challenges from globalized mass entertainment
and the demands of new generations of consumers, native operas were
under great pressure to revive themselves and ﬁnd their niches in the new
marketplace or become museum pieces. Each of these genres has been try-
ing in its own way to attract new audiences, but none so far has been very
successful.
Yue opera in Shanghai has experienced perhaps the most painful down-
turn, given its tremendous popularity and national inﬂuence during the early
PRC period and after the Cultural Revolution. The decade between the
late 1980s and the late 1990s may have been Yue opera’s most difﬁcult and
uncertain period, during which it had to rely on government stipends or
corporate charity for survival. Only four Yue opera companies remained,
the Shanghai Yue Opera House and three second-tier state-owned troupes
in the Hongkou, Jing’an, and Luwan districts. According to Lu Shijun, a
researcher at the Shanghai Yue Opera House and editor of Shanghai Yue
200 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 222 ===

Opera Gazetteer, the decline in Yue opera was reﬂected in the “three fews”:
few operagoers, few performances, and few Yue opera professionals.60 As
Lu observed, the more performances the troupes put onstage, the more
money the government lost on Yue opera, because box ofﬁce revenues did
not make up for the expense of each performance.
61
How to revitalize Yue opera became a hot topic in Yue opera circles and
concerned scholarly communities. Many symposia and conferences were
held to discuss related issues, and conference volumes and anthologies were
devoted to answering this very question. The title of one collection pub-
lished in 1994, T oward Glory Once Again (Chungxin zouxiang huihuang),
reﬂects the general aspirations of those who participated in these meet-
ings and contributed to the publications.
62 There was, however, a range of
opinion concerning the nature of the problem, and opera professionals and
scholars, as well as the leadership of the Shanghai Yue Opera House, includ-
ing Yuan Xuefen, put forth a wide variety of solutions. While many Yue
opera practitioners welcomed the attention, they also felt overwhelmed
by the sheer quantity of often contradictory opinions and expressed the
desire to be left alone to work on their art. As one Yue opera director com-
plained at a 1995 symposium: “No one seems to have a clear idea about
the main theme [of Yue opera]. In the past, it was anti-feudal. What is it
now? For example, the main-melody theme was thought to be not right
for Yue opera, but later it was deemed right again. It is now both right and
not right.” He then pleaded with the various theorists: “Quality produc-
tions need time to mature. Please do not put too much pressure on the
artists!”
63
Quietly but consistently, in the midst of these heated debates, Yue opera
practitioners have been making their own choices. They have selected top-
ics that stray from main-melody themes and stuck with those that are more
mundane, as reﬂected in a series of new productions such as Xishi Returns
to Her Home Country (Xishi gui Yue), of 1989; The Lotus Girl (Lianhua nü), of
1991; The Jade Hairpin(Yuzan ji), of 1996; and Cao Zhi and Zeng Luo(Cao Zhi
yu Zeng Luo), of 1996.
64 In the meantime, Dream of the Red Chamber con-
tinued to be the most popular Yue opera play. Then, in August 1999, the
Shanghai Yue Opera House successfully staged a special production of this
Yue opera classic for the newly constructed Shanghai Grand Theater. Yue
opera was the ﬁrst native opera to be performed in this palace of modern
performing arts, itself a landmark of Shanghai’s contemporary architecture.
The play created a sensation; local audiences as well as people from Hong
The Opera as History    201

=== PDF PAGE 223 ===

Kong and other cities packed the eighteen thousand seats for every per-
formance. The everlasting popularity of Dream of the Red Chamberhelped Yue
opera artists understand that Yue opera’s artistic strength lay in its ability
to explore love and passion, not grand nation-state narratives. 
Same-Sex Love in Women’s Yue Opera: Artistic Identity Redeﬁned
The 1998 Yue opera play Stage Sisters was produced during this Yue opera
artists’ soul-searching process. Although represented as an adaptation of
Xie Jin’s 1965 ﬁlm, from which it takes its title and basic story, the Yue
opera play is in fact not at all like the ﬁlm.
65 It tells a different story about
Yue opera’s history and the relationship between the two actresses. While
the ﬁlm derives its dramatic tension from conﬂicts framed in terms of good
versus evil, or the CCP versus the Nationalist Party, the play does away
with such political polarization and focuses instead on the theme of sis-
terly love. The theme song makes this clear from the outset and reminds
the audience throughout the performance what the play is all about:
Tough times are hard, they sing year in, year out;
Homeless anywhere, yet they make their home everywhere. 
Exhausting tragic and happy stories on the stage, 
Never forgetting sisterly love in the real world.
Several important changes depoliticize the play’s story. The two left-
wing ﬁgures, Brother Lin and the journalist Jiang Bo, are eliminated and
replaced by a secondary character, Ni Tao, a Shengxian native and pro-
gressive youth who loves his native opera and tries to help the actresses
deal with the challenges and temptations of the metropolis. He introduces
spoken drama and the patriotic play Wen Tianxiangto the actresses and later
writes the play The New Year’s Sacriﬁcefor Chunhua to perform. The bad char-
acters are also drawn in less political tones. While Commissioner Pan, of
the Nationalist Social Affairs Bureau, and the Nationalist secret agent are
eliminated, Manager Tang is rewritten so that he is no longer a character
with direct ties to the Nationalists but a politically insigniﬁcant local strong-
man who bullies his way through social relationships and exploits actresses
in his employ. The story line of the second half of the play is altered accord-
ingly. Politically charged developments such as the staging ofThe New Year’s
Sacriﬁce , the fund-raising performance, the lime-powder attack on Chun-
hua, and the courtroom drama either disappear completely or fade into the
202 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 224 ===

background, given only a few lines of treatment. Perhaps the most impor-
tant change between the ﬁlm and the play is the ending. While the ﬁlm
ends with the Party returning the humiliated Yuehong to society after
Liberation, the play conveniently ends in the winter of 1946, avoiding Lib-
eration and its signiﬁcance to the Yue opera story altogether.
By cutting out these political story lines, the play makes room for explor-
ing the relationship between the two actresses. Certain long-standing Yue
opera dramatic techniques are deployed to develop the theme of sisterly
love. One central device is the “drama within the drama” (xi zhong xi), which
is only hinted at but not fully employed in the ﬁlm. The play makes excel-
lent use of this device to develop a second theme of heterosexual love,
intertwining the motif of the butterﬂy lovers with the main theme of sis-
terly love. The two themes work together extremely well in building emo-
tional development, thanks to the peculiarly ﬂuid cross-dressing plays of
this all-female theater. The two actresses—Qian Huili, as Xing Yuehong,
and Shan Yangping, as Zhu Chunhua—are both skilled performers of the
cross-dressing plots seen in many Yue opera plays. While Shan Yangping
specializes in young female roles and excels at playing cross-dressing char-
acters, such as Zhu Yingtai and Meng Lijun, Qian Huili is a popular male
impersonator noted for her performances of Jia Baoyu and many other
young lovers. In Stage Sisters, the drama within the drama allows her to imper-
sonate the young male lover and thus enriches an otherwise gender-straight
performance. 
The four scenes of the drama within the drama punctuate the structure
of the typical love story: unity-split-unity. The play opens with the two
actresses, Chunhua and Yuehong, on a traditional stage in Shaoxing in the
early 1940s. They are performing the classic “Eighteen-Li Farewell,” in which
the cross-dressing Zhu Yingtai promises a happy Liang Shanbo her little
sister in marriage; the sister looks exactly like Yingtai. Their lively acting
wins an enthusiastic response from the audience. This scene not only helps
set the temporal and spatial frame for the story but also introduces the emo-
tional status of the two main characters, as a pair of young partners onstage
and offstage. This union, however, breaks down, and the second and third
dramas within the drama bring the emotion of the play to a double crisis.
Chunhua and Yuehong go onstage for one last performance together after
Yuehong announces her marriage to Manager Tang. The two have just had
a ﬁght, as Chunhua tried in vain to dissuade Yuehong. The program is “Meet-
ing at Yingtai’s Chamber,” in which Shanbo comes to request Yingtai’s hand
in marriage, only to learn that he is too late. The heartbroken lovers then
The Opera as History    203

=== PDF PAGE 225 ===

sing farewell to each other. In the course of their performance, the two
actresses cannot help but improvise lyrics that comment on their own
farewells to each other:
Chunhua: Sending Brother Liang off to the door, I hold your hand, not
letting you go. [Pulling Yuehong into a kneeling position side by side with her.] Don’t
you remember that we swore on the ancient theater that we would never
separate?
Yuehong: Not to separate, we still have to separate; you and I are not des-
tined to be together for all our lives. [Turning to face Chunhua and raising her hand
to wipe Chunhua’s tear, but Chunhua turns her face away in protest.] Not letting go, I
still have to go; there is never such a thing as sending off your Brother Liang
to the door.
Chorus [from the side]: It is impossible to tell if this is about the passion in
the play or the passion between the sisters, and there is no way to keep the
person who shares the same origin but turns out to belong to somebody
else!
The act ends with an emotional climax: Liang Shanbo (Yuehong) bids fare -
well to Zhu Yingtai (Chunhua) and runs offstage, and while Yingtai cries
out for Brother Liang, another voice calls out in a panic that Shang Shui-
hua has killed herself. Shocked by Shuihua’s fate and feeling desperate about
Yuehong’s future, Chunhua collapses.
The third drama within the drama occurs when Yuehong is committing
suicide after Manager Tang has accused her of being unchaste, locked her
in her bedroom, and convinced her that Chunhua has betrayed her. Only
after a desperate Yuehong has swallowed some poison does she receive a
secret message from Chunhua warning her about Tang’s trick and telling
her that she, Chunhua, is coming to rescue her. The message comes too
late, however, and a dying Yuehong sings “Shanbo at his last moments,”
interspersing her own lyrics about her longing for Sister Chunhua mixed
with the original lines expressing Shanbo’s longing for Yingtai:
Having no chance to sing with Sister Chunhua again, 
I play the dying Shanbo by myself one last time.
I request that my relatives bury me next to the ancient stage 
And erect two stone tablets inscribed
With Sister Chunhua’s name in red and Sister Yuehong’s in black.
204 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 226 ===

I cannot be with her again in this life, 
But I will deﬁnitely be her sister in my next life.
For audiences familiar with the classic story of the butterﬂy lovers, these
dramas within the drama—intertwining the beautiful love story of the het-
erosexual butterﬂy lovers, performed by two actresses, with a tale of same-
sex love between two sisters—enhance and intensify the play’s emotional
effects.
In the last act, Chunhua searches for Yuehong, who is nowhere to be
found in Shanghai. Sadly, Chunhua returns to Shaoxing to mourn Teacher
Xing on the ﬁfth anniversary of his death. Yuehong, who was rescued and
has been recovering in hiding, appears when she hears Chunhua’s prayers
for her, and the two sing a happy piece from “Eighteen-LiFarewell” on the
ancient stage of their hometown. The curtain falls at the end of the piece
with the local audience applauding the two sisters. The play is thus pri-
marily a story about the love between the sisters, the telling of which is
enhanced by references to the classic love story of the butterﬂy lovers. 
The play’s depiction of sisterly love has its roots in the tradition of the
same-sex culture of women’s Yue opera. This culture may be understood
along two lines: “homosexual relationships” (tongxing lian) and “sisterly love”
( jiemei qing). 
Homosexual relationships existed in the Yue opera circle, at least at the
level of gossip and the so-called mosquito tabloids ( wenzi xiaobao), cheap
irregular publications featuring scandalous rumors and chitchat. Numerous
allegations about homosexual relations surface to this day, and homosex-
ual love is reported to have been quite common among such new profes-
sional women as nurses, doctors, and schoolteachers in Shanghai in the
1930s and 1940s. Reliable written documentation is lacking, however, in
fan magazines, established tabloids such as Shaoxing Opera Dailyand Yue Opera
News, mainstream newspapers, and ofﬁcial documents. Homosexual rela-
tionships likely existed, not necessarily among actresses but rather between
actresses and unmarried independent professional women from the audi-
ence. The general attitude toward such relationships was one of uncertainty,
with neither strong support nor opposition. 
While homosexual love existed in the twilight zone between rumor and
actuality, sisterly love, or same-sex nonsexual relationships, was the main
form in the culture of women’s opera. Sisterhood ﬁrst developed through
the days of all-girls opera schools, when teenage girls slept under the same
The Opera as History    205

=== PDF PAGE 227 ===

roof, ate from the same wok, trained and suffered disciplinary beatings
together, and traveled and performed together. Sharing the same native-
place origin, training background, and aspirations for a better life, these young
actresses developed a strong sense of bonding after entering the metropo-
lis of Shanghai. They addressed one another as “older sister” (jie) or “younger
sister” (mei), and sworn sisterhood was common among Yue opera actresses.
Other than the most famous Yue opera ten sisters formed in 1947, there were
many sets of sisters in the Yue opera circle, and adoptive sisterhood was also
common between actresses and young women in the audience. The clos-
est relationships between actresses may have formed between  long-standing
stage partners, most well known among them being Yin Guifang and Zhu
Shuizhao in the 1940s and Xu Yulan and Wang Wenjuan in the late 1940s
through 1960s. Xu and Wang were perceived as very close to each other,
even though both were married and had children. 
Both nonsexual sisterly love and homosexual relationships were marginal
in society at large and subordinate to the dominant heterosexual relation-
ship. Yue opera actresses all wanted to get married and to marry well in
order to have good standing in society, and some did so at the expense of
sisterly love, as depicted in both the ﬁlm and the Yue opera Stage Sisters.
The relationship between Yin Guifang, a popular male impersonator, and
Zhu Shuizhao, a specialist in young female roles, tells much about sisterly
love crossed and destroyed by heterosexual relationships.
According to Yin Guifang’s recollections, she and Zhu Shuizhao ﬁrst
met and became friends when they performed together in Shenjiamen, Zhe-
jiang, in 1934. They performed together once again in 1937, after the out-
break of the War of Resistance against Japan. In Huangyan County, they
were persecuted by the police and conﬁned to the county jail for ﬁfty-three
days.
66 After being released from jail and before bidding each other fare -
well, the two became sworn sisters. Separately, each went to Shanghai, and
they once again became stage partners in 1940. During the ensuing years,
the two were close friends and well-established partners onstage. Together,
they joined in the New Yue Opera reforms, performed numerous popular
love dramas onstage, and participated in the Yue opera ten sisters’ fund-
raising performance in 1947 . Yin Guifang wrote about her complex feel-
ings toward Zhu Shuizhao: 
The director ordered me to be intimate with my lover—who, needless to say,
is my only long-term stage partner Zhu Shuizhao. We are lovers onstage,
and our feelings toward each other increase every day; as nine out of ten plays
206 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 228 ===

we perform are conventional love stories, we have come to forget that we are
actually love sisters. This practice has been very helpful for our acting on the
s t a g e ....  B u t  b e c ause of this, naturally we grow affectionate toward each
other. Zhu Shuizhao, my dear stage partner and lover, I am deeply in love
with you. I forgive any possible shortcoming in my only stage partner and
lover, so the sweet ambience on the stage would not be disturbed—for the
body of the actress is in the arm of the stage! Looking back, the masses appre-
ciated Yue opera because private feelings between men and women are always
dominant in every [Yue opera] play.
Many people, oh no, only those gossipers often intentionally create ridicu-
lous rumors as if to tease me. Am I angry? No—because I have decided to
treat these gossipers as characters in a play. Those who cannot tell the dif-
ference between onstage and offstage are just too nervous.
67
In this seemingly confusing passage, Yin made it clear to people who spec-
ulated about homosexual relations between herself and Zhu that the rela-
tionship was one of nonsexual sisterly love. She also explained to readers
that the director had demanded that she and Zhu become immersed in their
roles and portray authentic heterosexual love onstage, and that perform-
ing love dramas with Zhu resulted in the growing affection between them.
Obviously, the intense love dramas onstage combined with the intimate
relationship offstage led to public speculation about a homoerotic rela-
tionship between the two actresses. Notice that while Yin tried to clarify
the nonsexual nature of her relationship with Zhu, she confessed her deep
love for Zhu, a same-sex love enhanced by the heterosexual love they per-
formed onstage every day. 
In 1947, Yin was engaged to a male patron who later decided that he
really wanted to marry Zhu. Zhu married the man, and Yin remained sin-
gle all her life. The two sworn sisters never performed together again: Zhu
organized her own troupe and shifted her specialization to young male roles
because it was easier to ﬁnd a stage partner in young female roles, while
Yin Guifang’s career suffered from the lack of stable stage partners in young
female roles.
68 In 1954, Zhu and her company moved to Nanjing, and she
committed suicide when she was persecuted during the Cultural Revolu-
tion. Yin and her company moved to Fuzhou in 1958. She was tortured
and became partially paralyzed during the Cultural Revolution but was reha-
bilitated and returned to Shanghai in the 1980s. Yin passed away in 2000
at the age of eighty. As in Stage Sisters, the actresses’ intense sisterly love in
real life was enhanced by the heterosexual love they played onstage, which
The Opera as History    207

=== PDF PAGE 229 ===

was then destroyed by a heterosexual relationship. Unlike the story in Stage
Sisters, there was no obvious reconciliation and reunion for the two actresses,
aside from Yin’s fond memories of Zhu, published in her memoirs after the
Cultural Revolution.
69 Zhu Shuizhao, however, did not leave any words
in print about her relationship with Yin.
For most Yue opera actresses in Shanghai in the mid-twentieth century,
sisterhood was the primary relationship in their daily lives, and the strug-
gle for a better life, respectability, and status was the major concern. The
political struggle between the CCP and the Nationalists was in the back-
ground or, for many, simply irrelevant. For the creators of the Yue opera
Stage Sisters, sisterly love emerged naturally as the main theme after they
decided to depoliticize the original plot of the ﬁlm. The shift in focus to
sisterly love made the play truer both to Yue opera history and to the genre’s
artistic identity as a theater of love. As the composer Su Jinzou explained:
“From the very beginning, we made the decision to make the political tone
as light as possible. Everyone felt that the Yue opera Stage Sistersshould have
its own artistic characteristic and should emphasize sisterly love.”
70
Scriptwriter Xue Yunhuang hesitated before identifying sisterly love as the
theme, observing: “It was not the case that we set the main theme ﬁrst and
then developed the play around it. I started by thinking how to develop a
main thread and a few characters. I concentrated on sisterly love because
Yue opera was good at that.” It is revealing that, unlike the director of the
ﬁlm version, who wanted to make sure the ﬁlm’s main theme was under-
stood and properly expressed, the Yue opera producers focused on the
opera’s artistic characteristic, identiﬁed as the exploration of human emo-
tions, and the main theme then emerged naturally. As Xue Yunhuang noted:
“Everyone agreed that [Stage Sisters] was not a political play and should focus
on sisterly love, and that there was no need to develop a political thread. . . .
Moreover, the spectators would not be interested in politics. They would
want to see sisterly love.”
71 Su Jinzou similarly stated clearly that Yue opera’s
artistic characteristic is elaboration on human feelings, or yanqing.72
Neither Xue nor Su is in any sense a political radical or dissident. Both
are Party members, and Xue once served as vice president of the Shang-
hai Yue Opera House. They are mainstream personalities representing fairly
common views in the ﬁeld of local operas. Moreover, the creation of the
Yue opera Stage Sisters, as they and the two leading actresses emphasized,
was very much a collective effort. The scriptwriter, the score composer,
the director, and the leading actresses all actively participated in shaping
the ﬁnal product. Much was decided during rehearsals, rather than at the
208 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 230 ===

scriptwriter’s or director’s desk. “Usually, Yue opera is a synthesized art,
and everyone participates in the production,” Xue explained. “During the
rehearsal, if one person dislikes a detail and others do not disagree with
her or him, then the detail is gone.” He gave two examples of the troupe’s
improvisational approach. Xue had tried to incorporate the courtroom
scene, following Yuan Xuefen’s suggestion, but without success, because
no one in the rehearsal liked it. In contrast, everyone liked the drama
within the drama, and so he replaced the courtroom scene with Yuehong’s
suicide, making for a third drama within the drama. Moreover, the ﬁrst
version of the play more closely resembled the ﬁlm and retained such
details as Chunhua’s performance of The New Year’s Sacriﬁce, the attack with
lime powder, and Manager Tang’s accusation that Yuehong was the insti-
gator. Only after much feedback from both audiences and experts did
the team settle on the ﬁnal, 1999 version. Apparently, there was consensus
among Yue opera artists and audiences as to what would make a good Yue
opera play.
73
Xue and Su, therefore, spoke not only for the artistic characteristic of
the Yue opera Stage Sisters but also for the genre’s distinctive artistic iden-
tity as a theater of love stories. In the reform era, Yue opera artists were
able to reclaim the legitimacy of their theater’s concern with the private
and the everyday and refocus its productive energies on the love drama or,
more generally, the genre of yanqing.
The state’s new cultural policy endorsed the Yue opera artists’ approach
by showering awards on Stage Sisters. In 1998, the play was selected to par-
ticipate in the First Shanghai International Festival of Arts and was one of
three that won an Excellent Play award. At the end of 1999, the Shanghai
Yue Opera House sent the troupe to Beijing to participate in celebrations
commemorating the ﬁftieth anniversary of the founding of the People’s
Republic and to enter the competition for the Wenhua Awards sponsored
by the Ministry of Culture, the most prestigious ofﬁcial performing arts
awards in the nation. In 2000, Stage Sisters won the Ninth Wenhua Award
for New Plays, and the two leading actresses won the Wenhua Award for
Best Performance. The actresses also won the Plum Blossom Award for Chi-
nese opera from the National Association of Dramatists.
Yue Opera History Reconstructed
The Yue opera Stage Sistersnot only helped the genre claim an artistic posi-
tion for itself in the cultural landscape of the new era but also aided it in
The Opera as History    209

=== PDF PAGE 231 ===

distinguishing its history from the communist melodrama presented by
the 1965 ﬁlm and by Yuan Xuefen and her biographers. Both Su Jinzou and
Xue Yunhuang considered the current version to be closer to “historical
reality” (lishi zhenshi). To be sure, no one wanted to deny the facts of Yuan
Xuefen’s relationship with the CCP underground and left-wing intellectu-
als, but as Xue pointed out, “Yuan being attacked with a bag of dung was
her personal fate, not political struggle. It was not a struggle between the
two lines, and the class struggle interpretation does not accord with his-
torical reality.”
74 Xue and Su Jinzou both thought that the Party did not
have the level of inﬂuence on Yue opera’s development before 1949 that
the ﬁlm suggests; the play only softens this exaggeration while clarifying
other facts in Yue opera history. The new character Ni Tao, for example,
who replaces Brother Lin and Jiang Bo, is obviously a tribute to such his-
torical personalities as Nan Wei, Han Yi, and Xu Jin, who were crucial to
the Yue opera reforms of the 1940s. 
From the vantage point of the post-revolutionary era, Yue opera prac-
titioners were able to take a long view of their own history and place the
communist connection in perspective. The Yue opera Stage Sistersis, in this
sense, a story about Yue opera told by Yue opera people themselves. The
director’s notes, printed on the playbill, poetically describe this story: 
A pair of young sworn sisters leave their hometown in Shaoxing and come
to blaze new paths for life in Shanghai, a place where “even the streets were
paved with gold.” They take care of each other and share the hardships of
life—a story full of love and resentment, joy and sorrow, and partings and
u n i o n s  i s  u n f o l d i n g ....  
People say that the rivers and mountains of Shengzhou [Shengxian] have
spirit and are delicate, and that they have nurtured native daughters and a
native opera as beautiful as themselves. Coming from her native land, Yue
opera has overcome many hardships and absorbed many inﬂuences in the
metropolis, now trickling like a rivulet, now ﬂowing in waves....  
Tough times are hard, they sing year in, year out;
Homeless anywhere, yet they make their home everywhere. 
This is the song sung by the Yue opera people themselves—life is like a song!
75
This reading of Yue opera history emphasizes its native rural origin and
the long, continuous process of urban migration and transformation, car-
ried out generation after generation by native daughters. It is, in this sense,
210 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 232 ===

an ethnographic view of Yue opera history as a way of life maintained by
a group of people, as well as an expression of their native culture, negoti-
ated within the dynamics of a cosmopolitan urban society. As long as the
dynamic tension between the Zhejiang countryside and Shanghai the great
metropolis persists, Yue opera as a way of life will continue.
Yue opera was indeed an art developed by Zhejiang immigrants in Shang-
hai in the last century, and it still is today. From 1949 until the early 1980s,
immigrant actresses such as Yuan Xuefen, Fan Ruijuan, Fu Quanxiang, Xu
Yulan, and Wang Wenjuan dominated Yue opera. During this period, when
the state prevented urban in-migration in order to control urban popula-
tion growth, the locally trained younger Yue opera performers were largely
overshadowed by their more successful seniors. The reinstitution of a mar-
ket economy beginning in the 1980s has resulted in a new wave of urban
migration, and Shanghai has once again become a popular destination. Sig-
niﬁcantly, new generations of immigrant Yue opera performers contributed
much to the revival and maintenance of Yue opera in Shanghai after the dis-
ruptions of the Cultural Revolution. The last two decades of the twentieth
century witnessed the rise of a new generation of Yue opera stars who were
recent immigrants from Zhejiang and surrounding areas. The majority of
the younger generation of ranking performing artists in the Shanghai Yue
Opera House—including Zhao Zhigang, Fang Yafen, Wang Zhiping,
Zheng Guofeng, Zhang Ruihong, and Zhang Hailing—were from Zhejiang
and surrounding areas. The two stars of Stage Sisters, Qian Huili and Shan
Yangping, were from Zhuji and Jiande, Zhejiang, respectively. Youngsters
from Zhejiang composed the majority of Yue opera students in the Shang-
hai Native Opera School (Shanghai Xiqu Xuexiao) and were on their way
to becoming the next generation of Yue opera stars in Shanghai.
While the pattern of urban migration and expression of native culture
has remained a basis for Yue opera’s development in Shanghai, the terms
and conditions of that migration and cultural expression are very differ-
ent from before. The generations of Yue opera performers that have grown
up in the PRC period have had a much smoother experience than their
predecessors did, thanks to the struggles and ground-breaking achieve-
ments of these predecessors and to changes in modern Chinese society
since the early twentieth century. In the past, most entertainers came from
poor families who chose their low-status professions only to make a liv-
ing. Nowadays, entertainers in China are accepted members of society,
and stars even enjoy unusually high status, as public idols and cultural
celebrities, much like entertainers elsewhere in the world. Moreover, female
The Opera as History    211

=== PDF PAGE 233 ===

entertainers now enjoy the same privileges as their male counterparts, as
social celebrities and art professionals. The stigma that used to be attached
to actresses is a reminder of how much the gender norm has changed in
the past century. The Chinese state also grants many popular stars an elite
political status; the young Yue opera star Qian Huili, for example, is a mem-
ber of the Shanghai Political Consultative Conference and was appointed
vice president of the Shanghai Yue Opera House in March 2003. Although
Qian Huili, like Xing Yuehong, migrated from Zhuji to Shanghai, she
asserted that she does not personally identify with the character. “Not at
all. I have never had any hardship, as Xing Yuehong does. I have always
been cheered, protected, and supported by everyone. My career has been
smooth sailing all along.”
76 By “everyone,” she meant the government and
the leadership of the Shanghai Yue Opera House as well as her colleagues.
Shan Yangping, who plays Zhu Chunhua in Stage Sisters , however, had a
somewhat different answer to the question: “Xing Yuehong is a prototype
of immigrant actresses. Although the present-day society is perhaps dif-
ferent from before Liberation, the allure of the great metropolis is the same.
America is also like that—very tempting. There are very few actually like
Chunhua, and I cannot say that I stand on such a high moral ground as
she does.”
77 Indeed, the allure of a better life has always driven genera-
tions of Zhejiang’s native daughters to other countries, but the desire for
self-expression has been equally strong. Thus, during the difﬁcult years
of the 1980s and 1990s, some promising actresses, like Xing Yuehong, gave
up their careers and moved to the United States and Japan. Many stayed,
however, and worked to sustain Yue opera in Shanghai while making names
for themselves, and some have returned from abroad to resume their act-
ing careers.
78
The new generations of Yue opera performers found employment in state-
owned institutions stable and secure, although it did not necessarily make
them rich. Under the current system, a considerable portion of the  govern -
ment’s budget for culture is devoted to preserving and developing native
operas as treasures of traditional folk arts, which are seen as endangered
by a globalized mass popular culture. City and district governments under-
write the Shanghai Yue Opera House and a few district Yue opera compa-
nies, guaranteeing artists and administrators monthly salaries plus health
and retirement beneﬁts. This system provides baseline security to employ-
ees of these companies, and the diverse cultural market offers artists oppor-
tunities to earn extra income through various channels of production, to
help support their companies and meet personal expenses. Shan Yangping,
212 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 234 ===

for example, starred in a Yue opera television drama in 1991, ﬁnanced jointly
by Shanghai Television and China Central Television, and the ﬁrst Yue opera
karaoke video compact disc (VCD), “Song from the Heart” (Xinqu), in 1995,
sponsored by Eastern Television.
79 Wang Zhiping, another noted young
actress, with the backing of her home institution, the Shanghai Yue Opera
House, invested her own money and collected private funds for the pro-
duction of the 2001 hit The Butterﬂy Dream (Hudie meng).
80 Moreover, the
government also allows private, independent studios for native operas. The
noted Yue opera star Xiao Ya, who specializes in young male roles, for exam-
The Opera as History    213
5.4  Yuan Xuefen (right) gives her student Fang Yafen a lesson. (Yuan 2002)

=== PDF PAGE 235 ===

ple, began her private studio in June 2002 and has already staged a num-
ber of successful productions.
Looking back at the end of the twentieth century, Yuan Xuefen and other
senior Yue opera artists, now enjoying their old age, cannot help but feel-
ing nostalgic about the good old days of Yue opera (see ﬁg. 5.4) The younger
generations, however, seem less sentimental and sometimes appear, in the
eyes of their seniors, to be too content with the current situation. They,
too, certainly would like to see Yue opera become more popular, but it is
not entirely within their power to make this happen. Every era has its own
popular culture, and as a social and cultural phenomenon, Yue opera
belonged to the twentieth century. The opera will continue to exist as part
of China’s cultural tradition, as a representative genre of native opera, but
it no longer represents signiﬁcant social movements of the time.
214 The Opera as History

=== PDF PAGE 236 ===

215
Chapter 6
A Feminine Aesthetics
Produced in 1958 and ﬁlmed in 1962, the Yue opera rendition of the
 eighteenth-century novel Dream of the Red Chamber was perhaps the greatest
and most popular Chinese love story of the twentieth century. It is impos-
sible to assess the impact of women’s Yue opera in shaping a modern cul-
ture of love in twentieth-century Chinese popular culture without talking
about the play. An incident in Shanghai in the early 1970s vividly illus-
trates the play’s popular inﬂuence. A young man was running to catch a
bus, but the bus conductor, a young woman, closed the door, and the bus
pulled away without him. The young man cried out jokingly to the con-
ductor, parodying a line from the popular Yue opera play: “Cousin Lin, I
have come too late!” Bystanders all smiled, and the conductor blushed with
embarrassment. The words the young man spoke are from a line delivered
by the heartbroken Jia Baoyu when he arrives at his beloved Lin Daiyu’s
chamber shortly after her tragic death, and everyone on the street knew
the scene by heart. That the Yue opera play was still very much alive in
people’s memories during the Cultural Revolution, even though the radi-
cal state leadership banned it, suggests just how popular the play must have
been before the Cultural Revolution. 
In August 1999, the Shanghai Grand Theater staged a new production
of the play, starring Qian Huili and Shan Yangping, which turned out to
be a rare commercial success at a time when the genre had long passed its
golden age and native operas all faced declining popularity. Subsequent tours
of the play in Beijing in 1999 and 2001 were equally successful. Again, in
April 2004, the Shanghai Yue Opera House sent the play to tour several cities
in the northwest and southwest, including Xi’an, Lanzhou, Xining, Chengdu,


=== PDF PAGE 237 ===

and Chongqing. Local audiences received the play with great enthusiasm,
and many viewers sang along with the actresses during the performance.1
The play’s lasting popularity is a clear indication of the centrality of the
love theme in modern China’s popular culture and the strong inﬂuence of
women’s Yue opera in shaping the modern culture of love. 
The Poetics of Yue Opera: T oward a Feminine Aesthetics
Women’s entrance into the entertainment market as both actors and audi-
ence resulted in the feminization of opera content and style as well as of
the operatic body. While major changes occurred nationwide, many devel-
oped ﬁrst and most intensely in Shanghai, where modern Western ideas,
traditional Chinese aesthetics, and the quickly forming metropolitan tastes
of urban residents mingled, calling for new-style theaters. Every theatri-
cal form in Shanghai answered this call in its own way and experimented
with a variety of new strategies. Special effects and machine-operated stage
props, ﬁrst adopted by Beijing opera, new drama, and other local operas in
Shanghai, created visual spectacles that catered to the tastes of a develop -
ing, curious metropolitan audience. An emphasis on visual effects and emo-
tive acting, in contrast to the traditional emphasis on singing and restricted
acting within a spare stage setting, became trademarks of Shanghai-style
Beijing opera.
2 Shanghai opera responded to the need for theatrical reforms
with modern-attire plays, in which actors and actresses appeared onstage
in Western suits and cheongsams, with Western-style hairdos and leather
shoes (the women in high heels), and performed amid modern living-room
settings. The intellectuals’ spoken drama, by contrast, rejected the popu-
lar taste for pure spectacle and adhered to its own ideas of social and the-
atrical reform modeled on Western drama. 
Women’s Yue opera emerged amid a variety of evolving theatrical forms
as one of the most successful new theaters in the 1940s through the 1960s.
Striking a balance between a naturalistic acting style and the modern love
drama, and enhanced further by a feminized theatrical spectacle, women’s
Yue opera created a modern poetics of human emotions that helped set trends
for theatrical renewal in general. Yue opera’s feminized poetics—evident
in the way it developed its music, stage design, singing, and acting style
so as to best elaborate a feminized narrative of qing, or feelings—provoked
a unique and intense sensibility in the modern urban audience, not only
among fans but also among those who did not care much for Yue opera’s
love drama. Many middle-aged and older Chinese men who are not Yue
216 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 238 ===

opera fans have claimed that they like Yue opera because it is beautiful. For
many from the north, the Yue opera ﬁlm The Butterﬂy Lovers(1953) or Dream
of the Red Chamber (1962) might be the only Yue opera play they have seen
in its entirety. While many admitted that they had little patience for Yue
opera’s scholar-beauty cliché in general, they emphasized that Yue opera
music and singing “please the ears” (hao ting) and its costumes and stage set-
tings “please the eyes” (hao kan).
3
Yue opera fans appreciated the opera for its feminine poetics and the
love drama it elaborates. Fans of various ages give basically one reason for
their appreciation of Yue opera: Yue opera is beautiful. Wu Ping, a lifetime
Yue opera fan who began her association with the opera as a preteen in the
1940s, recalled that she was drawn to Yue opera by its beautiful actresses,
costumes, and singing as well as its love stories.
4 A group of middle-aged
women, the next generation of Yue opera fans, also emphasized Yue opera’s
beauty and its elaboration of human feelings. Li Jiang, who was born and
raised in Beijing, was passionate about Yue opera, even though she was a
northerner. She said repeatedly that Yue opera is “so beautiful”—the stage
scenery, the costumes, the actresses, the singing and acting styles, and the
music—all “so gentle and incredibly beautiful.” Li Jiang’s ﬁrst encounter
with Yue opera was in 1958 or 1959, when Fan Ruijuan and Fu Quanxiang
performed The Butterﬂy Lovers in Beijing. At the time, she was impressed by
the beautiful actresses and stage set but was too young to appreciate the
art. Her real introduction to Yue opera occurred in 1962 through a cluster
of Yue opera ﬁlms, including Dream of the Red Chamber and Emerald Hairpin. Li
used the word yangpai(foreign style), which Wu Ping also used, as opposed
to tuqi (rustic) to describe Yue opera aesthetics. She explained that Beijing
opera is too stiff and tough, and ping opera a bit too rustic and also a little
tough for her taste, even though these operas are from her northern home-
land. “I enjoy only Yue opera,” she said.
5 Fans also indicated that they appre-
ciated Yue opera’s dramatization of qing, especially “human feelings” (renqing)
and “affection,” “passion,” or “sentiment” (ganqing). The comments of these
fans echo the remark of the popular Yue opera star Yin Guifang, who said
in 1947 that “love and private feelings” ( er nü si qing) would always be the
center of Yue opera plays, because the audience appreciated it.
6
The vocabulary Yue opera fans used to express their appreciation for the
opera resonates with that used by Yue opera scholars and the performers
themselves. Yue opera scholars and artists have consistently described Yue
opera aesthetics as beauty (mei) that is soft, gentle, ﬂuid, and ﬂexible (rou).
The word rou is often used with yin (feminine), as opposed to yang(mascu-
A Feminine Aesthetics    217

=== PDF PAGE 239 ===

line). The term yin rou(feminine and soft) deﬁnes Yue opera’s particular kind
of beauty, and its antonym, yang gang(masculine and tough) often describes
the kind of beauty Beijing opera embodies. Indeed, soft feminine beauty has
characterized the idiosyncratic Yue opera aesthetics since the 1940s. 
Yue opera singing and character modeling are perhaps the two elements
that contribute most to its softness. About Yue opera singing and music,
the Yue opera director Huang Sha noted: “The softness of the tunes and
melodies is a distinctive feature of Yue opera as a genre. It is the main ele-
ment that contributes to the formation of Yue opera’s sentimental poetic
aesthetics.”
7 Yue opera music achieved its softness by doing away with the
deafening gongs and drums commonly used in Qing major operas and build-
ing on the pleasing folk melodies of the Jiangnan region where it had orig-
inated. Actresses sing with their natural voices, and their singing is like a
natural extension of their speech; its purpose is not to display elaborative
vocal techniques but to express a character’s complicated emotions. Com-
pared to vocals in Beijing opera and Italian opera, both of which involve
complicated techniques and special training, Yue opera singing appears
almost effortless and, accompanied by traditionalsizhu (lit., “silky string and
bamboo”) instruments such as the bamboo ﬂute and the huqin, a two-string
instrument played with a bow, moves listeners with its unassuming inti-
macy (see ﬁg. 6.1). The speech and singing use mostly Shengxian Man-
darin (Shengxian guanhua), in which vowel sounds are close to those of
standard Chinese (making it understandable for northern people as well)
and consonant tones are softer. In the early stage of women’s Yue opera,
actresses mainly used the sigongscale system, in which the huqin’s two strings
are treated as the sixth and third notes of the scale (somewhat similar to
the Western system’s A major) and deﬁnes the primary key area; this pro-
duces a lively, blissful tone but lacks a layer in the lower-note range. Dur-
ing the November 1943 premiere of The Fragrant Princess (Xiangfei), Yuan
Xuefen and her accompanist Zhou Baocai created a chai scale system, or
chai diao, in improvisation. Compared to the sigong system, the primary key
area of thechai scale system is where the huqin strings are treated as the ﬁfth
and second notes of the scale (somewhat similar to the Western system’s
G major); this system has a lower-note area that enables the actress to elab-
orate on more dramatic changes in the character’s emotions and sentiments.
8
Since then, the chai scale system has developed into a rich resource for Yue
opera music and singing that are uniquely expressive of sentimental feel-
ings. According to Yue opera musicologist Lian Bo: “The chai scale system
took shape in Japanese-occupied Shanghai in the early 1940s. It mainly
218 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 240 ===

expresses the sad and plaintive feelings prevalent in a troubled time. The
chai scale system, however, is also lovely, graceful, and charming, typical
of Jiangnan folk tunes nurtured by the region’s natural environment and
cultural traditions.”
9
As it carries the lyrics, narrative, and emotions, singing is the soul of every
successful Yue opera play of lasting inﬂuence. A 1983 statistic from the Chi-
nese Record Company, which had a monopoly on the record industry until
cassette tapes became popular in the late 1980s, attests to the importance
of Yue opera music to the genre’s popular identity: the Yue opera Dream of
the Red Chamberwas the best-selling record, with more than three million copies
sold, and the Yue opera The Butterﬂy Loverswas the third-best seller.
10
The creation of modern female images in Yue opera was another key
element in deﬁning the genre’s feminine aesthetics. Traditional operatic
images of women had been designed and deﬁned by men in Beijing opera
and other Qing major operas according to an orthodox gender system that
prioritized women’s virtue over their physical beauty. On the opposite side
of this moralistic orthodoxy was a public culture of erotica that objectiﬁed
A Feminine Aesthetics    219
6.1  Yue opera musical instruments. (Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997)

=== PDF PAGE 241 ===

women’s bodies as sexual parts, as seen in numerous minor-opera produc-
tions in the late Qing and early Republican periods. These were two man-
ifestations of the same misogynist system that subordinated women to men.
The situation began to change during the Republican period, as actresses
and female patrons became increasingly important. Minor operas had to
cleanse themselves of their misogynist erotic performances, and major
operas such as Beijing opera also began to reformulate their female images.
Beijing opera critics have long celebrated the female images created by the
four great female impersonators, such as Mei Lanfang’s aristocratic beau-
ties, Cheng Yanqiu’s suffering but virtuous women, Shang Xiaoyun’s right-
eous militant heroines, and Xun Huisheng’s intelligent and lively maids.
These female images, however, were created by men and more or less
reﬂected men’s ideas of women, and they never succeeded in attracting a
female audience, as attested by the predominance of men in Beijing opera
audiences throughout the Republican period. 
Women’s Yue opera set a new standard for operatic images of women.
The female images in Yue opera embodied not only the new era’s idea of
autonomous women but also a modern urban fascination with female phys-
ical beauty, offering a variety of lively female characters enhanced by del-
icate ornamentations. Popular appreciation of decorated female physical
beauty was especially well developed in Shanghai, which was located in a
region renowned for producing beautiful women and proud of being called
“the Paris of the Orient” in recognition of its leading position in China’s
fashion industry. Much talk within the Yue opera trade and among female
spectators concerned ways of enhancing the actresses’ physical beauty
onstage.
11 Women’s Yue opera used soft, fresh synthetic colors instead of
the strong, dark primary colors that dominated Qing major operas. It also
led the way in character modeling, using Western-style techniques such as
oil- instead of water-based makeup to enhance the actresses’ feminine
beauty. Women’s Yue opera was among the ﬁrst to use silk extensively for
its stage costumes. Silk was softer than cotton and came in more delicate
colors. The Jiangnan-Shanghai area was the center of China’s silk produc -
tion, and Shengxian natives composed a large portion of the workforce in
Shanghai’s silk industry. Being expensive and delicate, silk costumes
demanded great expertise in their care, and this expertise was more easily
found among Zhejiang natives than among other native-place groups. Most
stars could afford to have experts tend to their costumes, but since ordi-
nary Yue opera actresses knew how to care for their own costumes, the use
of silk was more common in Yue opera than in other operas.
12
220 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 242 ===

As women patrons competed with one another in costuming their favorite
actresses, and actresses competed in creating enchanting female images,
Yue opera directors were pressured to provide innovative stage designs that
would set off the fresh female images.
13 New designs for stage sets, lights,
and props in pinkish and greenish shades along with silk costumes evoked
feelings of warmth, gentleness, and ﬂuidity. This stage effect worked in
concert with the actresses’ naturalistic acting style to create a new aesthetic
of theatrical presentation—a feminine representation of the sentiments of
love drama. 
Yue opera’s new female imagery quickly won the hearts of a large audi-
ence, especially women. The Yue opera fan Wu Ping loved seeing actresses
in beautiful costumes and enjoyed the eye-pleasing stage scenery. At the
time, she recalled, acting skills were not as sophisticated as in later days,
and audiences paid more attention to the overall appearance of the stage
elements—the scene designs, the costumes, and the hairstyles. She espe-
cially enjoyed the performances of two actresses, Qi Yaxian and Zhu
Shuizhao. Qi, said Wu Ping, was good at playing young tragic female roles
and sang her lyrics very clearly, making it easier for the audience to fol-
low the plot. Wu Ping acknowledged: “Tragedies were my favorite kind of
story. Because I loved Qi Yaxian, I went to see her performances all the
time. I followed her performance no matter what new play she put on the
stage.” She also idolized Zhu Shuizhao because Zhu had such a beautiful
appearance and was a good performer. “Zhu Shuizhao was the [commonly
acknowledged] queen of Yue opera at that time!” Wu emphasized, “She was
very beautiful.”
14 It is apparent that Wu Ping embraced Yue opera as a whole:
for its visual presentation, its acting styles, and its sentimental love stories.
Cheng Rong, another early Yue opera fan who later joined Yuan Xuefen’s
company, was drawn to the opera partly because its imagery of ancient
women was so convincing to her—she had been collecting cigarette boxes
with depictions of ancient beauties and felt as if these ﬁgures had come to
life before her very eyes on the Yue opera stage.
15
Wu Ping admitted that plays about peasant lives did not interest her.
She considered them too rustic, and only well-composed stories with
gorgeous stage sets appealed to her. For this reason, she was also attracted
to Shanghai opera’s modern-attire productions. She did not like Beijing
opera, however, in part because it was difﬁcult for her to follow the north-
ern dialect and because of its emphasis on acrobatic ﬁghting. But no less
important, she deemed the characters “ugly” ( nankan) or “not good-look-
ing” (bu haokan). Her complaint: “The young female roles in Beijing opera
A Feminine Aesthetics    221

=== PDF PAGE 243 ===

wore dark-colored, old-fashioned clothes and sported depressing hairstyles
and makeup.”16 Yue opera was totally different. Almost forty years later,
the Yue opera’s ten sisters’ grand fund-raising performance of For the Love of
the Country, in 1947, was vivid in her mind. Wu Ping recounted in consid-
erable detail the plots and characters, and who played which roles. She
recalled the spectacle with relish, with all the popular stars appearing onstage
together in their best costumes. Like many Shanghai women then and now,
Wu Ping’s tastes may be summed up in two opposing terms: yangpai, mean-
ing “foreign style” with the implication of being modern and urban, and
tuqi, or “rustic,” which suggests backward and provincial. Not surprisingly,
she used the term yangpai for Yue opera and the term tuqifor Beijing opera.
17
The next generation of Yue opera fans, such as Li Jiang and her friends,
expressed similar views. 
Yue opera’s aesthetics began to gain nationwide inﬂuence during the
early years of the People’s Republic. At a 1952 national opera conference,
about two dozen local operas, including Beijing opera, ping opera, and
Shanghai opera, presented as many as one hundred of their best produc-
tions.
18 Yue opera playwright Cheng Rong, who attended the conference,
recalled: “All the local operas had almost the same appearance. They all
looked like one another, as they all imitated Beijing opera. You had no
idea what opera it was until the actors opened their mouths [to sing or
speak]. [But] when Yue opera went onstage, you saw the stage suddenly
illuminated. It was so fresh and so beautiful. The stage design, hairstyles,
and costumes were all so different and nice looking.”
19 Despite Cheng’s
clear partiality with regard to her own opera, her comments contain an
important element of truth. Beijing opera, by virtue of its status as the
opera of the capital and its historical inﬂuence, served as a model for
numerous local operas. Beginning with the 1952 opera conference, how-
ever, Yue opera’s fresh style and feminine aesthetics began to make a nation-
wide impact on other local operas, through many national and regional
opera conferences, numerous nationwide tours, and, most important per-
haps, ﬁlms of such masterpieces as The Butterﬂy Lovers and Dream of the Red
Chamber. Many local operas, especially minor operas, learned from Yue
opera’s stage design and character modeling and enhanced their own
production values.Within a few decades, local operas began to look some-
what similar again, and audiences could not readily distinguish one opera
from another until the actors spoke or sang—all local operas resembled
Yue opera, with soft, ﬂuid costumes, refreshing stage colors, and delicately
ornamented characters. 
222 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 244 ===

Male Impersonators: Women’s Ideal Men
The “young male impersonator” (nü xiaosheng) arguably made the most impor-
tant contribution to the femininity of Yue opera aesthetics. The opera the-
orist Gong Hede suggested:
Yue opera is a soft and beautiful feminine opera . . .  that is performed by
women and is good at telling women’s stories. It is women’s favorite opera.
The key to the establishment of this feminine opera is the young male imper-
sonator. The standard male impersonator should be handsome, delicate, and
bookish and have a natural grace and elegant bearing....  T h e  f a c t  t h a t  t h e
young male role is played by women determines that Yue opera’s main theme
is the love story and soft beauty is its main style.
20
Contrary to Gong’s claim, the male impersonator did not “determine” the
love story as the main theme of Yue opera; historically, as discussed in pre-
vious chapters, it was the love drama that facilitated the rise of women’s
Yue opera. There is no doubt, however, that the young male impersonator
has shaped the distinctive feminine aesthetics that made Yue opera the mas-
ter theater of love drama. More speciﬁcally, young male impersonators in
Yue opera embody women’s ideal men—elegant, graceful, capable, caring,
gentle, and loyal. 
The male impersonator began to take leading roles in women’s Yue opera
in the late 1940s and soon thereafter became the biggest attraction for Yue
opera fans. Li Huikang, a retired Yue opera playwright and researcher at
the Shanghai Institute for Research in Arts, considered the rise of the young
male character to be an indication of the maturity of women’s Yue opera,
21
but Lu Xun’s comments on the gendered spectatorship of Mei Lanfang’s
performances are perhaps more useful for understanding the Yue opera case.
Men and women, Lu Xun noted, saw different things in Mei’s performance:
men observing the women created by men, and women observing men play-
ing women. Similarly, in Yue opera, it may be said that women observed
the men created by actresses, while men watched women performing men.
The theory remains simple: just as Mei Lanfang and his cohorts created
women more or less from a male perspective and on the male body, so Yue
opera’s male impersonators created men more or less from a female per-
spective and on the female body. 
Yin Guifang, as Li Huikang pointed out, was, at the end of 1946, per-
haps the ﬁrst performer to establish the young male role as a lead in Yue
A Feminine Aesthetics    223

=== PDF PAGE 245 ===

opera, having just founded the Fanghua Company. Yin was an excellent
actress who successfully created numerous well-known representations of
men, including Prince Luolan in Desert Prince, Jia Baoyu in various theatri-
cal adaptations of Dream of the Red Chamber , and Jin Yuqing in The Prodigal
Son (Langdangzi) of April 1947, with script by Xu Jin and directed by Yan
Jin (see ﬁgs. 6.2–6.4). Yet, while Yin created women’s ideal men in Prince
Luolan and Jia Baoyu, she also staged a criticism of the kind of men who
disappoint women. In the modern-attire playThe Prodigal Son, for example,
the young schoolteacher Jin Yuqing meets and falls in love with Li Ping.
The two get married and establish a nice family. Yuqing unfortunately begins
to spend time with a playboy and ends up falling into traps of the urban
underworld. He becomes involved with a prostitute, Yang Liusi, and
spends days and nights in her brothel, which also features a gambling hall,
a bar patronized by alcoholics, and an opium den. Yuqing eventually runs
out of money and is thrown out of the brothel. Meanwhile, Li Ping has
had to take work as a domestic servant in order to provide for her father-
in-law and daughter Xiaoqing. One day, their house catches ﬁre and burns
down. That night, an exhausted Yuqing ﬁnally comes home, only to see
Xiaoqing crying alone amid the ruins of the house. He takes Xiaoqing to
an abandoned hut and tries to make a living by begging and by gleaning
and reselling scrap. Then the daughter falls ill, and Yuqing has no money
to buy her medication. Desperate, he steals a small amount of cash from a
woman outside a pawnshop, but the woman turns out to be his wife, who
has just pawned her coat to buy medicine for his father. Yuqing is greatly
ashamed. As he walks along the Huangpu River, Yuqing decides that he
can no longer bear to recall what he has done. Just as he is about to jump
into the river, he encounters an old friend, Zhu Fuhua, and Zhu helps Yuqing
get back on the right track. The production hit the theater world with a
bang and ran two shows every day for a full month. The last song Yuqing
sings on the bank of the Huangpu River became a popular piece. 
The play spoke a truth for women, that men’s selﬁsh and irresponsible
behavior was the direct cause of many broken families and destitute
women. While echoing government propaganda against drug abuse and
gambling, Yin’s play put forth a gendered critique of the situation faced
by many struggling Shanghai families. The ending in particular reﬂects
women’s views, as Jin Yuqing repents of his past wrongdoings and comes
back to restore his family. For most middle-class women at the time, divorce
was debilitating because women still lacked independent social status out-
side of marriage as well as the means to achieve ﬁnancial independence;
224 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 246 ===

even for working-class women, who earned their own wages, divorce was
the last resort in dealing with an alcoholic or gambling-addicted husband.
The best women could hope for when their husbands abused drugs or took
up gambling, therefore, was that their men would one day ﬁnd help, repent,
and come back to them. 
Xu Yulan was another inﬂuential male impersonator. Her debut as a young
male impersonator was in the 1947 comedy It’s My Fault(Shi wo cuo), with
a script by Tao Xian and directed by Shi Lei, about two childhood sweet-
hearts, Zhao Wenjun and Li Yuzhen. The parents of both families agree
on a marriage contract, but Wenjun later changes his mind, when he decides
that Yuzhen is not an adequate match and wants a daughter from a wealth-
ier family. His mother, however, cannot wait for the marriage to take place
and for grandsons to be born. On the wedding night, Wenjun says to Yuzhen
that they should be like brother and sister, rather than husband and wife.
Li Yuzhen then suffers considerably from her husband’s coldness and her
mother-in-law’s complaints about her failure to produce a grandson. Dur-
ing the civil-service examination year, Wenjun leaves home for the capi-
tal and earns a jinshi degree. Meanwhile, Yuzhen, who can no longer bear
her mother-in-law’s ill treatment, decides to end her life. At the moment
when she is about to jump into the river, Yuzhen unexpectedly encounters
her long-lost birth father, who takes her to the capital city. On the night
of the moon festival, Wenjun hears a woman’s voice chanting poems. When
he climbs up the wall to take a peek, he discovers that it is a beautiful young
lady; he instantly feels respect for her and falls in love with her. He sends
a go-between to the young lady to arrange a conference with her, and to
his great embarrassment, the lady he meets is none other than Li Yuzhen,
his wife. Overcome with regret, Wenjun kneels down before Yuzhen, apol-
ogizes, and asks for her forgiveness. The play, ending with their happy
reunion, reﬂects at once women’s criticism of men’s disloyalty and their
readiness to forgive the men when they return home. The song Zhao Wen-
jun sings when he apologizes to Li Yuzhen, “It’s My Fault,” which became
quite famous, praises Li’s, and hence women’s, virtue while criticizing and
making fun of his own mistakes with humorous lyrics.
22
In their long careers as young male impersonators, Yin Guifang and Xu
Yulan created many women’s men on the Yue opera stage and attracted thou-
sands of female fans. Fans developed crushes on their favorite actresses and
sometimes confused their love for the actresses with their feelings for the
characters their favorite actresses created. They wrote hundreds of letters
to their idols, some of which found their way to tabloid newspapers, while
A Feminine Aesthetics    225

=== PDF PAGE 247 ===

6.2  Yin Guifang (1919–2000), 1959. 
(Li Huikang 1995)
6.3  Zhu Shuizhao as Li Ping (left) and Yin Guifang as Jin Yuqing in The Prodigal Son
(Langdangzi), 1947 . (Li Huikang 1995)

=== PDF PAGE 248 ===

others appeared in companies’ promotional publications and fan publica-
tions. A letter addressed to another popular male impersonator, Fan Rui-
juan (see ﬁg. 6.5), published in Yue Opera News , reads:
When the curtain rose for the show Coral at the Great Shanghai Theater,
Miss Fan Ruijuan, who had stolen my heart, appeared before my eyes. My
heart boiled with excitement. I forgot about everything and anything. All
my heart and mind was concentrated on her. I could stop eating and sleep-
A Feminine Aesthetics    227
6.4  Yin Guifang as Prince Luolan (left) and Zhu Shuizhao as
Princess Yili inDesert Prince (Shamo wangzi), 1946.(Li Huikang 1995)

=== PDF PAGE 249 ===

ing, but I had to see her performance. For she alone occupied my whole heart.
I didn’t know anything else other than her. 
In this state of mind, I have passed a short few months. 
The Butterﬂy Lovers is such a sad drama. But who could make a clear line
between life and drama?
Her farewell show was The T ragic Story of the Butterﬂy Lovers. I felt too sad
to attend. But I had to go see it. After today, there would be no tomorrow.
When I walked into the theater, the play had already proceeded to the scene
“Meeting at Yingtai’s Chamber.” This seemed to give me a warning that after
this meeting, more tragic moments were to come. 
“Shanbo’s Last Days,” “Yingtai Mourning at Shanbo’s Bier”—one act fol-
lows another. The show was now over. The viewers all left with smiles of
satisfaction. Everything was over. Dragging my heavy legs, depressed, I
returned home, bringing back a broken heart. So long, Ruijuan! Lying in bed
restlessly, I could not fall asleep. From that night on, I have become an
absolute insomniac.
23
And as another reader wrote: “Ruijuan is a handsome man. It is a pity that
she is only a cross dresser.”24
In the mid-1950s, the Fanghua Company staged Baoyu and Daiyu(Baoyu
yu Daiyu), starring Yin Guifang. The play created a sensation everywhere
it went, and Yin Guifang’s Jia Baoyu was a big hit. In 1959, when Yin Guifang
and the Fanghua Company were leaving Shanghai and relocating to
Fuzhou, Fujian, thousands of her fans packed the Shanghai railway station
to see her off. Many were in tears, and as the train was about to depart,
people jumped onto the tracks to form human barriers and blocked the
train for some time.
25 Some fans missed her (or perhaps the Jia Baoyu she
created) so much that they took trains to Fuzhou just to see her and her
performance in Baoyu and Daiyu.
26
During the opening run, in 1958, of the Shanghai Yue Opera House’s
Dream of the Red Chamber , in which Xu Yulan played the affectionate Jia
Baoyu, fans called out for her every night outside the backdoor of her
house: “Jia Baoyu, Xu Yulan, come out. Please let us see you, please.”
27 Later,
after the premiere of the 1962 ﬁlm version, Xu Yulan became a nationwide
popular heroine whose appeal went beyond the women who were her fans
and reached out to men. “It was said,” Xu recalled, “that the ﬁlm was usually
only shown at county-level cities. But for some reason, my hometown Xin-
deng township also screened it. There was a rumor circulating in town that
228 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 250 ===

the CCP Central Committee approved the screening after Xu Yulan wrote
a letter of request.”28 Then, in 1979, after the ﬁlm was rescreened nation-
wide, Xu Yulan went to Yunnan to perform for soldiers ﬁghting in the Sino-
Vietnamese War. The young soldiers were overjoyed to see Jia Baoyu with
their own eyes. They were not alone in their excitement; a local girl threw
herself into Xu’s arms upon recognizing the actress’s Jia Baoyu.
29
Explaining her interpretation of the character Jia Baoyu, Xu wrote: “Jia
Baoyu’s love for Lin Daiyu contains his respect for women, his pursuit of
the ideal, and his encompassing concerns for his lover’s well-being. . . .
He is indeed an elegant, graceful, and talented young master above the
masses.”
30 Such a young man became an ideal type not only for women
but also for men desiring to ﬁnd true love in their lives. 
One important function that Yue opera’s male impersonators perform is
to make young female roles even more feminine. The typical lovers on a
Yue opera stage, both male and female, are beautiful, delicate, and grace-
ful, and their speech and singing are soft and sentimental. If Yue opera male
A Feminine Aesthetics    229
6.5  Fan Ruijuan as the ofﬁce worker in
Happy Family Reunion (Hejia huan), 1947 .
(Courtesy of Shanghai Yue Opera House)

=== PDF PAGE 251 ===

impersonators feminized the male role, then the young female roles are
unmatched in their softness and grace, setting up the standards for mod-
ern femininity. Wang Wenjuan, who played Lin Daiyu in the Shanghai Yue
Opera House production of Dream of the Red Chamber, won the hearts of mil-
lions of viewers as she brought Cousin Lin to life. In the novel, Cousin Lin,
an incarnation of a celestial, possesses unearthly frail beauty. When she sobs
in the Grand View Garden, the scene and the sound are so sad that birds
and ﬂowers cannot bear it—birds ﬂy away and ﬂowers fall like snow.
31 When
Wang Wenjuan shed tears onstage or on-screen, thousands of viewers could
not stop themselves from crying along with her. There is no way to quan-
tify how many tears the Yue opera Dream of the Red Chamberhas earned from
its audiences. The image of the Yue opera Cousin Lin materialized on Wang
Wenjuan’s body has since set the standard for later theatrical and ﬁlmic re-
creations of this popular ﬁctional beauty. 
Feminine Cast, Feminine Opera
But how “feminine” could women’s Yue opera be if the company and the-
ater owners, directors, and playwrights were mostly men? The answer lies
in the ways in which performance art is materialized on the performer’s
body. Generally speaking, any theatrical production is as the performer
presents it onstage at that particular moment. On a more particular level,
actor-centered performance was characteristic of all native Chinese operas.
In the early period of women’s Yue opera, for example, most actresses were
illiterate and there was no director or playwright. For the actress, prepa-
ration for a performance involved learning the rough story line and her
part and memorizing some basic lines. Most of the performance was impro-
vised onstage, through spontaneous interactions with stage partners cou-
pled with an awareness of the audience’s reactions. In the old “improvised
performance” (lutou xi ) system, common in local operas, actors were free
to perform anything their way as long as the audience liked it. Talented
actors could carry an audience for a long time with their singing and act-
ing without exhausting the lyrics and thus dominated the stage, while less
experienced or less talented actors often ran out of lines and devices quickly
and could not keep themselves onstage long enough to make an impres-
sion on the audience. 
The role of the actor was so important that even when modern theater
professionals entered Yue opera troupes in the 1940s, the actor-centered
system of performance did not change. Women’s Yue opera continued to
230 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 252 ===

grow around a constellation of superstars in the 1950s and early 1960s,
each of whom developed her personal style of singing and acting through
long-term improvisational experience and attracted her own set of loyal
fans. Even though the authority of the director and playwright has become
more ﬁrmly established in the past few decades, it has not deprived
actresses of their personal style and their power of ﬁnal interpretation. 
In the ﬁnal analysis, then, the all-female cast was the basis for Yue opera’s
unique femininity. The peculiar feminine aesthetics of Yue opera are
indeed built on the bodies of the actresses, just as the all-male cast of the
late Qing period Beijing opera embodied a masculine aesthetics. The point
is not simply that gendered qualities are constructed; it is, rather, a ques-
tion of who constructs what and out of what materials. Thus, if the femi-
ninity projected by the four great female impersonators of Republican era
Beijing opera was largely a male construction of the female that helped
deﬁne the masculine, then Yue opera’s construction of the male on the female
body yielded a kind of masculinity that served women’s interests and helped
deﬁne the feminine. In a general sense, the all-female cast was the key to
Yue opera’s creation of a feminine dynamic onstage. 
The importance of the all-female cast becomes clearer when women’s
Yue opera is compared with ping opera in Tianjin and boy-singers’ opera
in Taipei, on the one hand, and gender-straight performances within Yue
opera itself, on the other. Ping opera and boy-singers’ opera also featured
young male impersonators, but male actors always were a strong pres-
ence in the cast and dominated male roles in general. Although actors in
young male roles adopted a rather feminine style and young male imper-
sonators were popular, these theaters still fell short of establishing the
dominance of feminine aesthetics on the stage, owing to the presence of
male bodies. 
Gender-straight Yue opera, in contrast, never fully caught on with
national and international audiences, despite the CCP’s long-term support
for gender-straight performances. The ﬁrst gender-straight Yue opera
troupe was born in the Siming Mountain area in eastern Zhejiang, as part
of the CCP-led New Fourth Army’s propaganda team, during the War of
Resistance against Japan. The Siming Mountain Yue opera focused entirely
on revolutionary and war themes, and its repertoire of predominantly mod-
ern-attire plays, as well as the CCP’s modernist ideology, required gender-
straight performances in which men and women played the roles of their
own biological sex. The Siming Mountain Yue opera was in fact a very dif-
ferent opera that developed in parallel with women’s Yue opera, which was
A Feminine Aesthetics    231

=== PDF PAGE 253 ===

centered in Shanghai and spread throughout Zhejiang during the same
period. Except for their common origin and use of the same native Sheng-
xian Mandarin, the two operas had little in common, for they developed
very different melodies, musical accompaniment, costumes, stage sets, per-
formance styles, and content. In the early PRC period, Siming Mountain–
style Yue opera troupes spread rapidly across the province in coordination
with political campaigns such as land reform, implementation of the New
Marriage Law, and the Cultural Revolution, staging such revolutionary,
modern-attire plays as The White-Haired Girl, Sorrow of the Poor People(Qiong -
ren hen), and An Antique Coin (Luohan qian). This Zhejiang tradition of
gender-straight Yue opera was quickly pushed to the sidelines after the Cul-
tural Revolution, when political propaganda went out of fashion, and was
overshadowed by a popular revival of women’s Yue opera. As the “little
ﬂower” (xiao baihua) troupes, featuring only young actresses, mushroomed
throughout the province, only one or two government-supported gender-
straight Yue opera troupes remained at the ofﬁcial Zhejiang Yue Opera
House.
32
In Shanghai, women’s Yue opera has dominated since the late 1930s,
and experiments with gender-straight Yue opera proved even more difﬁcult
and unfruitful. During the latter half of the twentieth century, the ofﬁcial
Shanghai Yue Opera House followed the state’s lead and invested a great
deal of resources in developing gender-straight Yue opera. The opera house
produced a number of revolutionary modern-attire plays and trained sev-
eral generations of actors, though with limited success. Only a couple of
costume plays were somewhat popular, and a handful of actors achieved
name recognition among audience members, with only two, Shi Jihua and
Zhao Zhigang, acquiring signiﬁcant numbers of fans.
33 Created by state
ideology but never really embraced by audiences, male Yue opera actors
remained marginal in a genre dominated by women. It is no accident that
the most popular actor, Zhao Zhigang, is also the most feminine, and his
popularity owes not only to his excellent acting skills but also to his rela-
tively small build and feminized singing and acting style, which make him
more acceptable to Yue opera fans. Li Jiang and Cheng Liping liked Zhao
precisely for his femininity, and although others did not care for him, Li
Jiang and her friends agreed that Yue opera is all about the young male
impersonators and the all-female cast.
34
Complete feminization of male roles materialized on the female body
in women’s Yue opera has resulted in an even deeper feminization of female
232 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 254 ===

roles, making Yue opera performance exceedingly soft, and created a unique
environment that nurtured an exquisite feminine performance of hetero-
sexual love that has no match in gender-straight or mixed-gender theaters.
Commenting on the women’s opera of his time, the Ming dynasty literati
Zhang Dai, an opera connoisseur, remarked: “Though not perfect, women’s
opera charms people as it is so pretty and coquettish, easy and relaxed,
and soft and enchanting.”
35 Although Zhang Dai was referring to Kun
opera, his description easily ﬁts the feminine beauty of women’s Yue opera.
Zhang Dai’s appreciation of the feminine beauty of women’s opera as well
as his reservations on the art of women’s opera found echoes in the opin-
ions of contemporary Chinese male intellectuals, as discussed earlier in
this chapter. 
This feminine beauty of women’s opera, combined with the modern urban
sophistication nurtured by the city of Shanghai, became the trademark of
Yue opera and gave the genre its unique artistic and aesthetic identity. With
these characteristics, women’s Yue opera, as distinct from gender-straight
Yue opera, won a signiﬁcant place in China’s theatrical traditions. 
Women’s Voices, Women’s Narratives
As women’s Yue opera developed a distinctive modern feminine aesthet-
ics on the bodies of its actresses, it also represented a distinctive woman’s
voice speaking to the public through the opera. 
During the early Republican period, the intellectual and political elite,
mostly men, dominated the discourse of women’s liberation and gender
equality, making it part of nation-building ideologies, while women’s
voices, expressed by a handful of women writers such as Ding Ling, Bin
Xin, and Lu Yin, sounded weak and uncertain. In her discussion of women
writers during and after the May Fourth period, the literary scholar
Wendy Larson thus concluded that by the early 1930s there was no sub-
ject position available for women, and distinctive women writers, such as
Ding Ling, began to shift the focus of their writing “from love to revolu -
tion,” or from a more feminine to a more general (read “masculine”)  leftist
discourse.
36 Women’s voices became loud and clear in wartime Shang hai,
with best-selling women writers, such as Su Qing and Zhang Ailing, as
well as the so-called young lady writers of popular literature.But the war -
time boom for women writers did not endure in the postwar period. From
the early PRC period up to the end of the Cultural Revolution, women
A Feminine Aesthetics    233

=== PDF PAGE 255 ===

writers and women’s writing were framed within a general communist ide-
ology and assumed little gender-speciﬁc characteristics. Larson’s study fur-
ther shows that literature in contemporary China has retained its
“traditional masculine prestige.”
37 Contemporary women writers such as
Wang Anyi and Dai Qing, Larson contended, were not able to take a dis-
tinctive women’s position, and those who did, such as Can Xue, were then
marginalized for it.
38
If well-educated women writers largely echoed dominant masculine
ideologies, as Larson argues, then it should come as no surprise that
actresses did so all the more, for in general they had less literary education
than women writers and were thus less prepared to create their own rhet-
oric. As Yin Yicui, the former head of the CCP Shanghai Ministry of Prop-
aganda, has remarked: “Among the branches under the Ministry of
Propaganda, the print and electronic media often have reservations about
Party’s policies, while the entertainment circle is most willing to follow
the Party’s directions.”
39 She failed to point out, however, that popular-
culture artists have always both used and misused Party rhetoric to
advance their own agendas. 
While feminist scholars such as Wendy Larson are dismayed by women’s
lack of a subject position from which to speak, women may be seen as hav-
ing adopted various subject positions as necessary strategies for asserting
themselves, taking, shifting, and, whenever possible, creating new posi-
tions in search of a better place from which to speak. Thus, what matters
is that women did make themselves enunciating subjects and tried to occupy
meaningful positions in the public space.
The performing women of twentieth-century China constituted a new
type of enunciating subject whose speeches broke the male monologue in
the realm of public culture. Because of the increasing presence of women
in public culture, and as female voices became stronger and more assertive
over time, women’s performances were likely to produce new meanings per-
tinent to female experiences. This is perhaps most apparent in the case of
women’s Yue opera, but even during the Cultural Revolution, when women’s
Yue opera was temporarily sidelined, revolutionary heroines ﬁgured promi-
nently in model operas and ﬁlms. Although they may not have developed
their own grammar and rhetoric, women in entertainment spoke for them-
selves by taking advantage of various existing rhetorical strategies and by
engaging in a dynamic dialogue with mostly male elite discourses. From
wartime through the early 1960s, Yue opera actresses managed to tell their
stories onstage with borrowed languages ranging from the traditional rhet-
234 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 256 ===

oric of womanly virtue to modern discourses of nationalism and Marxism.
These narratives were as varied as women’s experiences and their rela-
tionships with different rhetorics. 
In the play Widow Ma’s Inn , for example, the performers used several
rhetorical strategies in rendering a well-known character. Originally a
chuanqi story from the Tang period, by the early twentieth century, Widow
Ma’s Inn had become a typical misogynist play that portrayed women as
seductive, dangerous, irrational, stupid, driven by uncontrollable sexual
desire, and possessed of a weak sense of morality. Women, the play sug-
gested, should therefore be contained, controlled, and educated by men.
In an opera script printed in the 1930s or 1940s, Widow Ma’s attempt to
seduce Di Renjie meets with Di’s ﬁrm rejection and results in Di lecturing
the widow on female chastity. An ashamed Widow Ma then becomes deter-
mined to remain chaste and to raise her son properly. Her son eventually
passes the civil-service exam and marries the daughter of the minister, who
invites Widow Ma to the capital for the wedding. When Widow Ma arrives
at the household of the minister, she realizes that he is none other than Di
Renjie. She is so ashamed that she wants to commit suicide, but Di is able
to persuade her to stay. He then memorializes the emperor, and a memo-
rial board is bestowed upon Widow Ma in recognition of her having safe-
guarded her chastity and properly raised her son. Di thus once again saves
the widow from falling into disgrace.
40 In the early 1950s, the PRC gov-
ernment banned the play as “obscene theater,” but then, in 1956, a new
edition of the play, produced by the Hezuo Company, turned the story
into an overt criticism of Di Renjie, the hypocritical Confucian moralist
who betrays his lover, Widow Ma, because of his political ambition.
41 Three
discourses underlie these two versions of the story: a traditional misogyny
that makes women sexual beings for men to desire and to control at the
same time; a leftist discourse of women’s liberation; and a Neo-Confucian
puritanism shared by moralists from the Qing to the PRC periods.
In her performance in the 1940s, Xiao Dan’gui vividly portrayed the
young widow’s strong sexual desire, her longing for love, and her sense of
shame when rejected. Xiao, however, made the widow commit suicide upon
recognizing that the minister and father-in-law of her son is Di Renjie, the
young scholar she encountered twenty years before.
42 In China’s long his-
tory, female suicide was, as summarized by Margery Wolf, “the weaker’s
weapon,” a socially acceptable way for a desperate woman to protest against
and take revenge on the ones who had wronged her, or to clear her good
name when it was compromised by rumors and accusations.
43 Particularly
A Feminine Aesthetics    235

=== PDF PAGE 257 ===

in the context of chaste widows in the late imperial period, as pointed out
by Susan Mann, women’s suicide as an autonomous action was respected
and digniﬁed.
44 With her suicide, Xiao’s Widow Ma ultimately rejects Di’s
patronage, implicitly implicates Di, and transforms herself from a pathetic
widow into a digniﬁed person. Xiao’s portrayal of Widow Ma reveals not
only her appropriation of the May Fourth rhetoric about the suffering Chi-
nese woman in the old society but also her struggle to give human dignity
to women’s sexual desire and the sexually desiring woman in the face of
the old misogynist demand for women’s chastity and the new reformist
purge of eroticism. Sadly, the tension in Xiao’s treatment of Widow Ma
mirrored the tension in her own life and anticipated her tragic death. Her
sexual relationship with her boss Zhang Chunfan put her in an ambiguous
and shameful status between an old-fashioned concubine and the illegal
lover of a married man, which made her vulnerable to charges of moral
depravity. Her performance of supposedly obscene plays, moreover, made
her appear unclean and unprogressive to the modernist intellectuals who
otherwise felt sympathy for her as the victim of the feudal evil man Zhang
Chunfan. Ironically, Zhang accused her of being unchaste when she tried
to develop a relationship with modern forces through her director Leng
Shan. In the end, Xiao died to restore her dignity. 
Yuan Xuefen, perhaps the most intellectual among Yue opera actresses
before 1949, represents a different case. Yuan passionately echoed the left-
ist rhetoric of women’s liberation and gender equality in her quest for inde-
pendence, equality, and respectability for women. Writing in the mid-1940s,
she noted:
Women are unfortunate, especially women in our country. Having suf-
fered feudalism and experienced extreme pain in human life for thousands
of years, women still get the worst of it even today when the rhetoric of
gender equality is bandied about ....  D on’t you see that only women are
asked to be virtuous wives and good mothers? Men are never asked to be
“virtuous husbands and good fathers.” Why is that? Being respectful should
be mutual and equal [between husband and wife], and sacriﬁce should also
be worthwhile. The so-called “virtuous wife and good mother” is only a lofty
phrase men use to make women their slaves.
45
Apparently, Yuan found in the discourse of women’s liberation and gender
equality powerful articulations of her personal struggle for independence
236 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 258 ===

and respectability, and the characters she created on the Yue opera stage,
such as Sister Xianglin and Zhu Yingtai, reﬂected her understanding of
women’s liberation. 
Fu Quanxiang, another actress, was inspired to express her life experi-
ence through her portrayal of courtesans. Fu’s ﬁrst marriage to Zhu
Xiangyun, owner of the Shenzhou Inn, in 1941, was certainly not a happy
one. For this marriage, Fu called an end to her three-year commitment to
a religious life, alienated her good friend and colleague Yuan Xuefen (with
whom Fu had joined the sect), and earned herself a bad name. Tabloids
accused her of breaking her religious vows and of marrying for money,
interpreting her marriage as another example of an innocent girl being cor-
rupted by the evils of urban society.
46 When asked about her personal life,
Fu simply replied: “Actresses all had similar experiences in their personal
lives in the past, and there is no special value to discussing these things
n o w ....  I  don’t want to think about these unpleasant things in the past,
and they have all gone after I cried myself out at my meeting with Master
Chen Letian.
47 Now, I care only to leave my art with the younger gener-
ation, and my reﬂections on life have been crystallized in the theatrical
images I have created.”
48 Her goal, she said, was to convincingly portray
a few courtesans. Fu has created several courtesan characters, including Jiao
Guiying and Du Shi’niang, who suffer humiliation and betrayal at the hands
of their lovers and kill themselves in protest. Another character, Li Wa,
destroys her beautiful eyes to make her literati lover focus on his book, not
her beauty, so that he will pass the civil-service examination.
49 Using the
May Fourth rhetoric of the suffering woman in feudal society, Fu managed
to register her own grievances against male exploitation of women and their
love, sex, and labor. 
Qi Yaxian’s story provides yet another example of women shaping their
own narratives by appropriating various discourses. Qi was born into a poor
family in Shanghai.
50 According to Qi’s recollections, her father picked up
petty jobs only now and then and failed to take responsibility for supporting
the family; he was the kind of person who would lend the family’s last few
dollars to other people while allowing his own family to go hungry. He
also had a bad temper and beat his wife and children when he was unhappy.
About her mother, Qi wrote:
My mother was an ordinary housewife: hardworking, diligent, and frugal,
embodying many of the traditional virtues of the old generations of Chi-
A Feminine Aesthetics    237

=== PDF PAGE 259 ===

nese women. She was skinny but could bear a great deal of hardship in life.
She gave birth to ﬁve children. I am the fourth, with three older brothers
and one younger sister. Married to such a man, with such a heavy family
burden, Mother raised us children one by one, with tears in her eyes, endur-
ing hardship with a dogged will.
51
Because of the family’s poor ﬁnancial situation, Qi Yaxian never had a chance
to go to school, and her brothers all started to work as apprentices at a
young age. As the elder daughter, little Yaxian helped her mother with
housekeeping and contracted needlework to add to the family income.
When Qi was twelve, her mother got her a position as a utility girl in a
Yue opera company, as she did not want the child to toil in factories or
work in a dance hall serving male customers, and that was the beginning
of Qi’s Yue opera career. Qi recalled:
[Mother] was poor all her life. In her suffering and hardships, the only thing
that could console her was to attend women’s opera performances. Paying
a few cash for a seat far from the stage in a small, run-down theater, she
enjoyed performances of familiar scholar-beauty stories. She cried for the
people of the past, sympathized with female characters’ misfortune, and
cheered for happy marriages at the end. With these performances, Mother
could, for a moment, forget her worries and her family’s miserable condi-
tion. She was certainly delighted that her daughter was now to join the
opera.
52
Qi eventually became a popular star whose specialty was “tragic female roles”
(beidan) in “bitter plays” (kuxi). She explained her personal relationship with
tragic roles:
In my childhood, there were more tears than joy. Tragic plays composed
the largest group of the plays I learned in girls’ opera school. The plays I
performed after my apprenticeship were also mostly tragedies. Because I had
suffered poverty and struggled in my life, and because I was particularly famil-
iar with the bitterness in women’s lives, my acting in tragic plays was vivid
and quite moving.
53
Two May Fourth themes ran through these various narratives in Yue
opera. First, women are almost always suffering, and even Yuan Xuefen’s
generally more assertive characters cannot escape it. While the elite dis-
238 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 260 ===

course on women’s suffering in imperial China’s patriarchal system was one
obvious origin of this narrative, it is imperative to take note of another
source—a folksong form popularly known as “crying tone” ( kuku diao) sung
by women throughout China’s countryside in olden times, from which
sprang a number of minor operas including Yue opera, boy-singers’ opera,
and ﬂower-drum opera. Qi Yaxian’s remarks about suffering women in bit-
ter plays, therefore, should be understood not simply as echoes of the elite
discourse but also as a women’s narrative rooted deeply in women’s his-
torical experiences. 
Second, most Yue opera plays took the form of the scholar-beauty love
story. As Zhang Ailing and Su Qing argued during the 1940s, women artists
tended to focus on love stories because a woman’s real-life drama had always
centered on her marriage. However, by using the framework of the love
drama, women’s Yue opera also offered multifaceted narratives pertaining
to women’s experiences. While Beijing opera’s imperial narratives reﬂected
traditional elite (male) views and tastes that neglected women’s experiences,
and spoken drama exempliﬁed modern intellectual (again mostly male) con-
structions of nation-state ideology that subordinated women’s concerns to
national interests, women’s Yue opera became a vehicle by which women
could tell their own stories and create their own public expressions in the
scholar-beauty formula. If the May Fourth intellectuals appropriated the
popular crying tone within a traditional women’s culture, then the scholar-
beauty formula appears to have been the opposite case, in which women
took on the May Fourth construction of women’s liberation and free love
in order to articulate their particular aspirations.
Intellectuals were critical of this appropriation. Women, they claimed,
needed to be freed from feudal bonds so that they could better serve the
cause of national salvation and help build a strong nation. In his 1945 essay
“Old and New Women in Chinese Theater,” the leftist writer Yang Han-
sheng presented a review of changing theatrical representations of Chi-
nese women over time, from the feudal era, through the May Fourth period,
to the time of the War of Resistance against Japan. Yang noted that in
operas during the Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties, Chinese women suf-
fered all kinds of hardship and oppression. After the Republican Revo -
lution, however, women rose up under the banners of “science” and
“democracy,” and the new women appeared onstage. Yang listed several
female characters featured in scripts by famous elite writers, such as Hu
Shi, Tian Han, and Guo Moruo, that exempliﬁed women’s struggle to lib-
erate themselves from feudal bonds and embrace free love and marriage.
A Feminine Aesthetics    239

=== PDF PAGE 261 ===

Yang went on to describe the female characters produced within the war
culture of the 1930s:
After September 18th [1931, when Japanese troops occupied Manchuria]
and before July 7th [1937, the ofﬁcial outbreak of the War of Resistance],
the new women of China appeared onstage as heroines. 
We all remember the play Seven Women in a Thunderstorm[(Baofengyu zhong
de qige nüxing), by Tian Han]. The women protagonists in this play were
no longer vexed by love questions centered on their personal lives but con-
cerned with national salvation and resistance to the Japanese invasion. The
goal of their effort is no longer free love but national liberation. Compared
to the heroines of the May Fourth era, these women have clearly made a
great leap forward....  
After the war broke out on July 7, China’s new women all stood up and
rushed to take up various forms of work for the divine cause of resistance.
For this reason, a great number of heroines and women warriors appeared
in our wartime theaters....  Today’s Hua Mulan, for example, does not need
to go home; she probably would have already dispatched herself heroically
to the occupied area to ﬁght the enemy.
54
To Yang’s dismay, his model Hua Mulan soon disappeared from the stage,
and love drama once again dominated wartime Shanghai’s popular culture.55
The intellectual and political elites were apparently not able to impose their
agenda on Yue opera and other popular genres. Even during the early PRC
period, Yue opera continued to produce women’s narratives built around
their mundane experiences, and audiences continued to prefer Yue opera
love dramas to dry state-sponsored revolutionary plays. 
Yue Opera’s Dream of the Red Chamber: A Feminine Reinvention
The Yue opera Dream of the Red Chamber is a telling example of women’s
inﬂuence on the novel’s reinvention as a great love story that deﬁned the
popular sentiment of love in the twentieth century. Cao Xueqin’s eigh-
teenth-century novel Dream of the Red Chamber is an important part of
China’s cultural heritage and has inﬂuenced many aspects of modern Chi-
nese culture, from specialized scholarship to popular entertainment. The
novel gained fame among literati men and women immediately after its cre-
ation and remained popular throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies, even though the Qing state tried to ban it.
56 The novel’s reputation
240 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 262 ===

continued to grow during the twentieth century, when literary and schol-
arly interests made its study a specialized ﬁeld of inquiry known as Redol-
ogy (Hongxue). It was considered one of the “four great novels” (sida qishu)
of the Ming and Qing dynasties, the other three being The Water Margin,
Romance of the Three Kingdoms, and Journey to the West (Xiyou ji). Unlike the
other three novels, however, Dream of the Red Chamber was not successfully
integrated into popular entertainment and did not reach a large illiterate
or semiliterate population until the 1940s. Yi Bing, a Yue opera playwright
and administrator, was part of the leadership of the Shanghai Yue Opera
House in the early 1950s. He observed in 1959:
Many stories from Dream of the Red Chamber had been staged in Kun opera,
Beijing opera, and other local operas. But they were not as fortunate as plays
adapted from Romance of the Three Kingdoms, The Water Margin, and Journey to the
West, many of which have been reworked by generations of artists and are
still an important part of the contemporary stage, attaining immortal artis-
tic status. But most plays adapted from Dream of the Red Chamber were forgot-
ten [until recent times].
57
Yi Bing attributed this past lack of success in adapting Dream of the Red Cham-
ber for the opera stage mainly to the inability of theatrical arts to capture
the “rich and broad social content” of the novel. For a Marxist like Yi Bing,
the phrase “rich and broad social content” referred to Mao Zedong’s
instruction that the novel be read as a textbook of China’s feudal society.
58
A more convincing explanation, however, may be found in the domi-
nance of love drama in Republican Shanghai’s popular entertainment, for
it was within this context that the novel became a popular modern love
story. Beijing opera and other male-centered major operas from the Qing
period had little interest in the novel’s focus on domestic affairs and love
relationships, or the tedious details about court politics; in contrast, they
drew widely on stories about the Monkey King in Journey to the West, the
rebels in The Water Margin, and the great military strategist Zhuge Liang in
Romance of the Three Kingdoms. It was only in the twentieth century, with the
growing interest in themes related to love and women’s roles in society,
that popular entertainment began to draw on stories from the novel Dream
of the Red Chamber . The Beijing opera master Mei Lanfang was among the
ﬁrst to stage Lin Daiyu, the novel’s female protagonist, but his solo piece,
Daiyu Buries Flowers (Daiyu zanghua), was based on traditional elite male
interpretations of a young lady saddened by the sight of falling ﬂowers, a
A Feminine Aesthetics    241

=== PDF PAGE 263 ===

metaphor of her own passing beauty. It was certainly not one of Mei’s more
successful plays, despite his graceful singing and dance. In the 1940s, the
novel gained increasing favor with popular-entertainment genres and was
adopted by Suzhou story-singing, Shanghai opera, Yue opera, and ﬁlm. A
contemporary source pointed out: “1944 is the year of Lin Daiyu. The whole
city is staging Lin Daiyu, from Beijing opera and ﬁlm to the Yue opera Lin
Daiyu, which ﬁnally opens at the Nine-Star Theater!”
59 Together, these pro-
ductions made the novel a popular love story. 
Women’s Yue opera troupes began to stage solo acts drawn from the novel
in the early 1940s. Zhi Lanfang’s Daiyu Buries Flowers, recorded around 1941,
appears to be the earliest extant record of such performances.
60 Yuan Xue-
fen staged Lin Daiyu (Lin Daiyu) in 1944, and Yin Guifang and her stage
partners ﬁrst performed the story in 1945.61 In the mid-1950s, Yin Guifang
and her Fanghua Company put on Baoyu and Daiyu, which immediately
became a big hit in Shanghai and Beijing. In Shanghai, the play was sold
out for one hundred consecutive days, with two shows daily. During its
Beijing tour, the company had to move the performance to the Labor The-
ater, a four-thousand-seat open-air theater, and extended the show for sev-
eral days.
62 Over the course of her acting career, Yin Guifang played the
protagonist Jia Baoyu many times, in four different versions, and was remem-
bered as one of the most successful Jia Baoyus. Her portrayal transformed
the character from a lighthearted playboy, as he was commonly perceived
at the time, into a caring young man noted for his passionate and tender
feelings for women and his loyalty to his lover.
63
In 1958, the Shanghai Yue Opera House produced a new version of the
story penned by Xu Jin, with Xu Yulan as Jia Baoyu and Wang Wenjuan as
Lin Daiyu. This version was also a hit. It toured widely within and outside
of China, greatly enhancing Yue opera’s national and international repu-
tation. Then, in 1962, the play was made into a color ﬁlm that, perhaps
more than anything else, helped popularize both Yue opera and the novel,
making Jia Baoyu and Lin Daiyu household names throughout the nation. 
Cao Xueqin’s Dream of the Red Chamber, as many scholars have noted, is
much more than just a love story, as it deals with many different aspects
of human life, such as religion, politics, money, disaster, sex, marriage and
family, and fate as well as love and desire. It is monumental as both a polit-
ical novel and a yanqing novel containing 120 chapters and featuring more
than seven hundred characters ranging from monks and nuns, slaves and
entertainers, peasants and servants to merchants, ofﬁcials, aristocrats, and
imperial concubines. In addition, another two hundred or so names are men-
242 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 264 ===

tioned in the narrative.64 Two main themes run through the book: the polit-
ical and the emotional. The political theme develops around the vicissi-
tudes of the Jia household, whose rise, fall, and revival within a span of
several generations are contingent upon court politics and the emperor’s
unpredictable temper but are also affected by corruption and power strug-
gles within the complex multigenerational household. The other theme
develops around the emotional world of Jia Baoyu, the teenage son of the
Jia family, contrasting his appreciation for young, unmarried women and
their pristine world inside the Grand View Garden with his disgust for adult
men and their dirty, competitive world outside. 
In the novel, Lin Daiyu and Jia Baoyu are human incarnations of two
celestial beings. Baoyu is, as his name indicates, a precious stone that was
left unused by the legendary ﬁgure Nü Wa when she ﬁnished repairing the
fallen sky. The stone was ﬁrst assigned a position as the “divine compan-
ion of heavenly ﬂowers” (shenying shizhe), ﬂowers being a common metaphor
for young women in Chinese literature. While wandering along a heav-
enly river, he saw a lonely little herb. He took a liking to it and nurtured
it with sweet dew, the cream of heaven and earth, and the herb grew, day
by day, into a female celestial being. She used to say that she had nothing
like sweet dew to give him in return for his favor, but should he decide to
visit the earth, she would certainly accompany him and pay him back with
all her tears. Baoyu is thereafter born with a piece of jade in his mouth,
and Lin Daiyu, her surname composed by two “wood” radicals indicating
her herbal origin, turns into the most beautiful, delicate, and sentimental
of all women. Xue Baochai, another celestial being, is born with a golden
lock that matches Baoyu’s jade. When Lin Daiyu and Xue Baochai move
in with Baoyu’s family, a romantic triangle forms among the three protag-
onists, and the stage is set for a love tragedy to unfold. Lin Daiyu sheds
tears for her love all her life as she can never be sure that she will be united
with him in marriage, owing partly to her powerless position as an orphan
and partly to Baoyu’s love for Baochai and the pleasure he takes in the com-
pany of young women in general. After Daiyu has exhausted her tears, she
returns to heaven, and Baoyu eventually returns as well after completing
his earthly duty to the Jia household, having passed the civil-service exam-
ination and fathered a son with his wife Baochai. 
Although the relationship between Jia Baoyu and Lin Daiyu serves as
the emotional center that helps hold the numerous threads together, it is
only one part of Baoyu’s love, which covers at least two dozen young women
and a couple of young men, that is fully described in the novel, reﬂecting
A Feminine Aesthetics    243

=== PDF PAGE 265 ===

the male-centered polygamy common in traditional Chinese society. Only
about a dozen chapters, eight of them in the ﬁrst thirty-four chapters, fea-
ture details of Baoyu’s relationship with Daiyu. Lin Daiyu dies in the ninety-
seventh chapter, and, before and after, each of the lovely young women
living in the Grand View Garden leaves, one after the other, to meet her
own, in most cases tragic, fate. Near the end of the story, as the world of
the Grand View Garden crumbles, Jia Baoyu deserts it and disappears into
the world of the Buddha. The novel, however, ends with the beginning of
a revival of the Jia household as Baoyu’s young nephew, Jia Lan, passes the
ﬁrst level of the civil-service examination and the new emperor revises the
late emperor’s punishment against the family. 
The Yue opera Dream of the Red Chamberelects to focus on the Baoyu-Daiyu
love story, knitting together details from the dozen or so chapters that
speciﬁcally feature the relationship between the two, while the political
fortunes of the Jia household fade into background and most of the other
important characters are not even mentioned. It is interesting to note that
Cao Xueqin, likely being limited by his male perspective, never described
female homosexual relationships in the Grand View Garden, where many
beautiful young women and only two young men, Jia Baoyu and his pre-
teen nephew Jia Lan, lived closely together. Baoyu, who loves and is loved
by these women, is the center of this feminine world, and Baoyu’s love for
Daiyu is the most intense but not the only and exclusive love. Taking a
woman’s perspective, the Yue opera play elevates Lin Daiyu to a position
comparable to that of Jia Baoyu and makes the love relationship between
the two equal and exclusive. The feminine perspective of Yue opera thus
helps reinvent the novel as a modern love story in two ways: ﬁrst, by focus-
ing on the emotions unfolding in the feminine world of the Grand View
Garden while treating the masculine world outside only as background and,
second, by focusing on, hence promoting, a monogamous love relation-
ship between Baoyu and Daiyu while omitting, hence demoting, the tra-
di tional male-centered polygamous system of love relationships as well as
the male same-sex love relationships described in the novel. 
In the 1958 version of the play, Lin Daiyu, played by Wang Wenjuan,
is still quite young when her mother, the sister of Jia Baoyu’s father, dies
and her maternal grandmother, the matriarch of the Jias, has her delivered
by boat to the Jia household. Daiyu has no siblings, and her father dies
soon thereafter. Living alone in the rich, powerful, and complex house-
hold of her uncle, Daiyu is sensitive about her vulnerable situation. Jia Baoyu,
played by Xu Yulan, in contrast, is the only surviving son by the principal
244 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 266 ===

wife of his father, a high ofﬁcial and master of the household. Unusually
good-looking and intelligent, Baoyu is the prince of the household, spoiled
by his grandmother and mother and indulged in the company of his beau-
tiful sisters and cousins. Growing up together and sharing unconventional
views, Baoyu and Daiyu develop a deep affection for each other (see ﬁg.
6.6). But the adults choose Xue Baochai, daughter of the sister of Baoyu’s
mother, as Baoyu’s bride because they consider Baochai to be a better
inﬂuence, somebody who can help them in their efforts to curb Baoyu’s
“wild” behavior and set him on track to prepare for the civil-service exam-
inations. Knowing that Baoyu will not agree, the adults tell him that he is
marrying Cousin Lin and conceal their real plans from Daiyu. On his wed-
ding night, Baoyu collapses when he sees that his bride is really Baochai
and learns that his Cousin Lin has died. A few days later, a heartbroken
Baoyu visits the Bamboo Lodge and pours his heart out before Daiyu’s bier.
A Feminine Aesthetics    245
6.6  Xu Yulan as Jia Baoyu (left) and Wang Wenjuan as Lin Daiyu in Dream of the 
Red Chamber (Honglou meng), Shanghai Yue Opera House, 1958. This Yue opera 
masterpiece re-created Cao Xueqin’s eighteenth-century novel as a love drama 
for millions of modern Chinese. (Shanghai Yueju gaige wushinian tekan, 1992)

=== PDF PAGE 267 ===

Keeping his promise of eternal love to Cousin Lin, he walks out of the pros-
perous Jia household, abandoning this dirty world once and for all. 
The play depicts the development of love between the two protago-
nists in a series of episodes organized into several main acts including “Daiyu
Enters the Jia Household” (Daiyu jinfu), “Reading Tale of the Western Cham-
ber” (Du Xixiang), “Daiyu Buries Flowers,” “Daiyu Burns Poems” (Daiyu fen-
gao), “The Perfect Gold-Jade Marriage” (Jin-Yu liangyuan), and “Baoyu
Mourns for Daiyu and Leaves Home” (Kuling chuzou). 
Baoyu and Daiyu are awakened to their love for each other when, sur-
rounded by ﬂowers in the Grand View Garden, they break the taboo and
steal a reading of the forbidden love story between Cui Yingying and Zhang
Gong in Tale of the Western Chamber. Then, left in a powerless position by the
death of her father, Daiyu becomes worried about the future of her love
for Baoyu and “sheds tears from winter to spring, and from summer to
autumn,” as the lyrics describe it. 
In “Daiyu Buries Flowers,” one of the most poetic scenes, Daiyu collects
and buries fallen ﬂowers amid a gorgeous spring scene in the garden and
is saddened as she thinks of her own fate. She sings:
Within the broad expanse of heaven,
Where could I ﬁnd a tomb for the blossoms?
Better to shroud the fragrant remains in silk
And bury the beauty with a handful of clean earth. 
Pure you come and pure you go,
Not stuck in the ditch and getting mired. 
People consider me silly burying ﬂowers,
But who will bury me when I die?
When spring leaves and takes youth away,
Who would notice the fallen blossoms or the dead maid?
When Daiyu overhears the wedding plans for Baoyu and Baochai with-
out knowing the details, she collapses at the thought that Baoyu has betrayed
her. Throwing her poems into the brazier, Daiyu sings her last words: 
All my life 
Poems and books are my close friends in the inner chambers;
Brushes and ink are my blood and ﬂesh. 
...  
246 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 268 ===

These poems are not ﬁshing for fame and compliments;
All I hope is to ﬁnd a soul mate who can appreciate them. 
But now that the soul mate has gone away,
How can I still keep these poems?
Have all heartbroken poems burned in the ﬁre!
This handkerchief with poems on it used to be carried by him all 
the time;
It has wiped so many of my tears in the past. 
Who would know his heart has changed while the poem handkerchief 
is still new?
What a pity my devotion has been repaid with his hypocrisy. 
If I had known human feelings were thinner than paper,
I wouldn’t have kept the poem handkerchief till now. 
Today sees the end of all my love;
Only a crescent moon witnesses the burial of the soul of poems.
Daiyu dies as the wedding music makes its way into her lonely cham-
ber in the Bamboo Lodge. At the same time and in another place, a happy
Baoyu gently sings to the person he thinks is his dear Cousin Lin, her face
covered by a red bridal cloth: 
Now I can marry you;
My heart brightens like wedding candles. 
Past illness and worry have all gone away;
The future will be ﬁlled with endless happiness. 
From now on,
I will get up early and help you wear ﬂowers in the spring,
Stay up late to guess at riddles in the winter,
Light incense to take pleasure by your side in calligraphy and paintings. 
From now on,
The room will be full of witty words in soft voices;
Like water, which cannot be cut by a knife, we cannot be separated. 
It’s proved true that the expansive Milky Way has a bridge after all;
The Cowherd and the Weaving Girl, though separated, can still meet in
July.
Baoyu cannot believe his eyes when he takes off the red cloth and sees
Baochai’s face. When he ﬁnally understands what has happened, he imme-
A Feminine Aesthetics    247

=== PDF PAGE 269 ===

diately cries out for Cousin Lin, singing in tears: “Where are you, Cousin
Lin? You must be seriously ill and dying, your heart tortured and your tears
ﬂowing endlessly!” He implores the matriarch:
Both Cousin Lin and I are painfully ill,
And our illness comes from the same source. 
I beg you to let us stay in the same room.
Let the two lovesick ones sympathize with each other, heart to heart, 
So that we may see each other every day when we are alive,
So that we may be buried in the same tomb when we die. 
My dear Grandma!
There is nothing in the world I want to have
Except to live and die with Cousin Lin.
Seeing that his pleading has no effect on the matriarch, who has always
let him have his way till now, Baoyu soon realizes that everybody is in on
the plot. He rushes out to ﬁnd his Cousin Lin, only to collapse when Baochai
announces that Daiyu has died. 
The last act, “Baoyu Mourns for Daiyu and Leaves Home,” is set in the
Bamboo Lodge, several days after the wedding. Walking into Daiyu’s cham-
ber and faced with her bier, Baoyu is immediately overcome by a wave of
sadness and cries out: “Cousin Lin, I have come too late!” Only Daiyu’s faith-
ful maid, Zijuan, stands by the bier as Baoyu pours his heart out. Looking
around the once familiar place, now so empty without its mistress, Baoyu
is making up his mind: 
A mistake is made ﬁrm with all the irons in the world;
A wrong marriage is made by a single red rope. 
The broken sky could be ﬁxed by the Goddess Nü Wa,
But it is impossible to repair broken hearts. 
Having left this ﬁlthy world,
You are as clean as snow and ice. 
How then could my clear conscience compromise with these 
vulgar minds?
Sobbing, Zijuan says softly: “Young Master, please go back now. It is late.”
The temple bell tolls in the background. Murmuring, “Yes, go back now,
go back now,” Baoyu walks out, throws his jade to the ﬂoor, and disap-
pears into the twilight. The curtain falls as the chorus sings: “He throws
248 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 270 ===

away the jade and rids himself of gold; he gives up this dirty world and
leaves behind the prosperous nest built upon bloody competition.”
In the novel, scattered throughout the last thirty or so chapters after Daiyu
has departed are descriptions of Baoyu’s desperate efforts to communicate
with Daiyu, waiting for her every night in his dreams and visiting Zijuan at
the Bamboo Lodge to ask about Daiyu’s last days. He needs to ﬁnd mean-
ing in Daiyu’s death and in his love for her. The bond between the two lovers
is ﬁnally resolved only when Baoyu awakens to the Buddhist truth that all
worldly desires are but illusions that bring only suffering. In fact, the Bud-
dhist theme is so strong that it was possible for the classical scholar Wang
Guowei to read the novel as a Buddhist text that points out the vanity in
human affairs and shows that deeply felt loss can awaken people to the Bud-
dha’s truth. The Yue opera play, however, makes Baoyu’s mourning for Daiyu
a simple display of his unfailing love and casts his abandonment of the world
as an act of loyalty to his lover. As the scriptwriter Xu Jin suggested, the
emotional journey on which the play takes the viewer will be completed
only if Baoyu can convince the viewer of the sincerity of his love and matches
Daiyu’s sacriﬁce with his own.
65 Indeed, not until Baoyu throws away his
jade and walks out into nothingness is the great love tragedy born. 
Signiﬁcantly, almost all renditions of the novel in popular forms in the
1940s and 1950s focus on a monogamous love story and depict a feminine
world centered on Jia Baoyu, the feminine teenage boy. For example, Huay-
ing Studio’s 1944 ﬁlm Dream of the Red Chamber, written and directed by Bu
Wancang and starring Yuan Meiyun and Zhou Xuan, has a similar plot and
character development as those in the 1944 Yue opera Lin Daiyu and the
1958 Dream of the Red Chamber. The ﬁlm also centers on the domestic and fem-
inine world of the Grand View Garden and features a group of predomi-
nantly female characters, with only the minimal presence of male characters
including Baoyu’s father and a few male servants. Furthermore, as in Yue opera,
the character Jia Baoyu is played by a woman, the noted actress Yuan Meiyun.
This feminization of Cao’s novel in Shanghai’s popular entertainment of the
mid-twentieth century provides yet more evidence of a general trend that
is most clearly manifested in women’s Yue opera. 
It was the unique feminine aesthetics developed in women’s Yue opera
that gave the feminine narrative of Dream of the Red Chamber its perfect form.
Yue opera’s actresses ﬂeshed out, on their own bodies, a constellation of
enchanting female ﬁgures and the feminine Jia Baoyu, and these images
were so popular that they became standard portraits of these characters.
Yue opera renditions of the novel, with the ﬂuid operatic acting style, body
A Feminine Aesthetics    249

=== PDF PAGE 271 ===

posturing, and cutting-edge character modeling, helped bring Cousin Lin
and Jia Baoyu to life. Moreover, the beautiful arias featured in the Yue opera
play, enhanced by lyrics drawn from the novel’s poems, carried the audi-
ence through an intense emotional journey with the protagonists. If these
hundreds of poems in the novel deﬁne the work’s poetics, then Yue opera’s
arias fully bear this poetics. The arias circulated across the nation, through
the 1962 ﬁlm and millions of records, and came to symbolize what the story
was all about. The 1944 ﬁlm, limited by its realistic style, had no such fem-
inine operatic aesthetics in place to help enhance the feminine narrative,
to articulate the complexity and intensity of the characters’ emotions, or
to bear out the special and traditional poetics of the novel. Thus, as the
1944 ﬁlm quietly faded into the past, the movie industry was content to
simply ﬁlm the 1958 Yue opera play rather than make another ﬁlm. 
The Yue opera ﬁlm was immensely popular. It attracted four hundred thou-
sand viewers when it was ﬁrst released in Hong Kong in 1962. It was an
instant success in Mainland China, but the ﬁlm was quietly removed from
circulation soon after its premiere as the radical leftist leadership tightened
its grip on the cultural market. When it was rereleased in 1978, however, it
set a box ofﬁce record nationwide. Across the country, many places showed
the ﬁlm around the clock for several days in order to make maximum use
of their copies within their limited time slots.
66 Large numbers of viewers
watched it several times and shed tears in the theaters. One Yue opera fan
went to see the ﬁlm every day after work until the local run was over, and
many collage-educated young men living in and outside of Shanghai began
to appreciate Yue opera after viewing the ﬁlm.
67 The Yue opera play also
brought the story to millions of the illiterate and semiliterate, and numerous
people read the novel after viewing the play in the theater or on the screen. 
The Yue opera Dream of the Red Chamber greatly popularized the novel while
increasing the genre’s inﬂuence and prestige. Yue opera’s remaking of the
novel into a great love tragedy helped shape the popular reception of Cao
Xueqin’s novel in modern China more than any other interpretation or schol-
arly work. Even Chairman Mao’s instruction to read the novel as a text-
book on the feudal society has had less effect on the book’s popular
reputation. Known as a master theater of the love drama and with a clus-
ter of popular plays such as The Butterﬂy Lovers, Tale of the Western Chamber, and
Dream of the Red Chamber, women’s Yue opera inscribed its feminine imprint
on the culture of love and instilled a feminine sentiment into popular sen-
sibilities regarding gender and sexual relationships in modern China. 
250 A Feminine Aesthetics

=== PDF PAGE 272 ===

251
Conclusion
For at least ﬁve hundred years, from the mid-Ming to the last decades of
the twentieth century, local operas represented a prominent part of pop-
ular culture and an important aspect of Chinese life, and their transforma-
tions were integral to epochal social and political upheavals. In the
twentieth century, the massive entrance of Chinese women into the public
realm and their active participation in popular culture resulted in a pro-
found transition of opera culture, from the realm of men to an artistic and
social world in which actresses and female spectators ﬁgured prominently.
The feminization of the operatic body gave rise to a distinct feminine opera
culture of the twentieth century. While the transition was a general
process, it was manifested most intensely in the phenomenon of women’s
Yue opera in Shanghai. 
The early development of Yue opera comprised two major transfor -
mations—from rural to urban and from all male to all female—which
occurred in the late nineteenth and ﬁrst half of the twentieth centuries.
The increased prominence of Yue opera, and of minor operas in general,
may be seen as an expression of many modern processes, such as the dete-
rioration of the rural economy, the rise of treaty-port cities as industrial
and commercial centers, and mass urban migration. Major political and
ideological revolutions of the period also facilitated the transformation of
Yue opera and of minor operas more generally. The 1911 Republican Rev-
olution lifted the ban against women in the entertainment market that had
been imposed by Qing law and custom; the subsequent May Fourth New
Culture Movement promoted ideas of women’s liberation and free love and
marriage as opposed to arranged marriage and hence sanctioned love themes

=== PDF PAGE 273 ===

that were central to minor operas. The emergence of Yue opera as a female
opera, then, should be viewed not as a special case in cultural development
that ran contrary to the trends of the time but as a phenomenon that most
intensely expressed the gendered nature of these historical processes. 
The success of women’s Yue opera in Shanghai was a ramiﬁcation of the
city’s social formation, characterized by key factors of gender, class, and
native-place ties, and revealed the city’s basic cultural characteristics—
bourgeois, colonial (domestically as well as internationally), and feminine.
Yue opera’s constituency came mainly from three powerful new groups
in Republican Shanghai that helped deﬁne the city’s social landscape: an
urban middle class; Zhejiang, more speciﬁcally Ningbo-Shaoxing, immi-
grants; and women. First, as the largest industrial city and the most impor-
tant commercial and ﬁnancial center, Shanghai was home to a great number
of capitalists, modern businessmen, and white-collar professionals as well
as apprentices at printing houses, shop hands in modern stores, and indus-
trial workers. The concentration of these new groups in Shanghai nur-
tured China’s ﬁrst generation of the urban middle- and lower-middle class.
These wage earners or wives of wage earners made up the majority of
Yue opera’s audience. Second, Shanghai was a city built by settlers.
1 Divi-
sions among various immigrant groups from different native places,
though not necessarily always so clear-cut, were a basic factor in the city’s
social life and political economy. If most Subei natives and many Shang-
hai natives composed the lower layers of society, members of the new
bourgeoisie were mostly natives from the more economically developed
Jiangnan region. More speciﬁcally, the powerful Ningbo-Shaoxing busi-
ness group and intellectuals strongly backed Yue opera, and the opera’s
success in turn symbolized the rising power of this native-place group in
the city. Third, Shanghai had a high, perhaps the highest, concentration
of new types of women, which included factory workers, shop assistants,
domestic helpers, middle-class housewives, students, ofﬁce workers, and
professionals such as accountants, teachers, nurses, doctors, and actresses.
Mostly young immigrants in a young metropolis marked by a semicolo-
nial cosmopolitanism, these women found unprecedented, though still quite
limited, freedom in pursuing their personal interests, among which was the
choice to patronize public entertainment. During this important period of
transition in gender norms, women’s Yue opera provided opportunities for
various women to expand their lives beyond their social stations. 
When historical conditions were right, the actions of young actresses
made it all happen. When a group of girls from the poor countryside of
252 Conclusion

=== PDF PAGE 274 ===

Shengxian joined the ﬁrst all-girls opera school in 1923, when female
Shengxian opera troupes frequented Shanghai in the mid-1930s, and when
female troupes joined refugees ﬂowing into the falling city in the late
1930s, they probably did not think they were making history. But their
struggle for economic survival, human dignity, sexual autonomy, and social
status against all sorts of gender- and class-based exploitation constituted
an important dimension of China’s modern history. Key to the actress’s
struggle was the need to rescue herself from a traditional public culture
of erotica that had ﬁxed its voyeuristic gaze on her sexual body and to
transform herself from the lowly female entertainer into a modern artist.
This would be possible only if she could transform her opera from a bawdy
peasant form into a reﬁned and socially meaningful urban theater. Fortu-
nately, the actresses’ struggle converged with two modern processes: the
formation of an urban bourgeois culture with a strong female component
and the dissemination of elite nation-building rhetoric in theatrical
reform. Through a series of efforts to reform Yue opera, actresses turned
the opera into a master theater of the modern love drama and an urban
theatrical spectacle. While Yue opera’s romanticized and digniﬁed love
stories appealed to middle-class and female audiences, the patriotic mes-
sage attached to the principal love drama won political legitimacy for the
opera. 
As Yue opera actresses remade the opera into a decent theater, they simul-
taneously achieved the status of art workers. Their quest for respect, dig-
nity, and full social status won the support of a large middle-class female
audience, left-wing intellectuals, and a new public educated in the rheto-
ric of women’s liberation. Actresses’ struggle against class- and gender-
based traditional contempt toward the female entertainer culminated in a
series of public events in the late 1940s. Sister Xianglin, the union incident,
the collaborative fund-raising performances, and the Xiao Dangui inci-
 dent, staged in both the theater and the mass media, were all part of a public
drama that discursively transformed the public deﬁnition of the actress. The
dramatic transformation of Yue opera and its actresses was a central event
that took place in the limelight, and the resulting prominence of a women’s
culture gave the city’s modern culture a strong feminine ﬂavor. 
Feminine V alue
Romantic love and love drama had dubious reputations in modern China’s
public culture. While they dominated popular literature and entertainment,
Conclusion    253

=== PDF PAGE 275 ===

they occupied a lower position in the overall cultural hierarchy, looked
down upon by elitist artists and cultural connoisseurs as trite and criti-
cized by intellectual and political elites as self-indulgent. Various male
authorities since the Qing period thought that the emotions of personal
love belonged to the feminine, private sphere and were hence trivial mat-
ters. From such an elite male perspective, it is easy to dismiss the femi-
nine opera and its love drama as insigniﬁcant and inconsequential.
Educated elitist women struggling to break conventional gender norms
also tended to sideline Yue opera as a women’s cultural ghetto in which
self-indulgent female fans enjoyed actresses performing stereotypical
feminine clichés.
2 This bias against the feminine opera culminated during
the Cultural Revolution, when women’s Yue opera was banned, and the
Maoist notion that “times have changed, men and women are the same”
tried to make women like men.
3 Opposition to feminine opera continued
in the post-revolution era. A recent commentary, provoked by two Yue
opera productions— The Butterﬂy Dream, of 2001, and the Shanghai Grand
Theater version of Dream of the Red Chamber, of 1999—provides a clear exam-
ple of how disturbing Yue opera’s femininity can be to its critics. The author,
displaying a superﬁcial and impressionistic knowledge of Yue opera,
attacked the opera, from its music to its male impersonators, and denounced
it with indignation:
Yue opera is simply the sediment of the dirty and rotten elements in the
long river of Chinese opera tradition, and it brazenly exhibits and elabo-
rates the decadent and frivolous sentimentality from the Five Dynasties [907–
60] to the present ....  Y u e  o p e r a  distorts the true character of many
intellectuals in history as it depicts them in a sickly manner. Yue opera cas-
trates traditional intellectuals’ innate unswerving determination, as expressed
in the motto that scholars can be killed but cannot be humiliated, and steals
their aspiration to bring peace to the world starting from self-cultivation and
ordering the family and the state [xiushen qijia zhiguo pingtianxia].
4
Combining an old Confucian discourse on gentlemanly conduct with
the more recent discourse of nation building, the author expresses an
unreﬂective male elitist prejudice against Yue opera’s femininity, contrast-
ing it to the masculine tradition in Chinese opera represented by Beijing
opera. As harsh as it is, there is nothing new in this commentary. 
Yue opera has been loved and censured for its renowned femininity ever
254 Conclusion

=== PDF PAGE 276 ===

since the 1940s. As a feminine theater featuring emotionally intense fem-
inine narratives, Yue opera provoked strong emotional reactions in view-
ers, and where its admirers saw beauty, its critics saw decadence. Yue opera
fans were notorious for their unrestrained public expressions of love for
their icons, while critics expressed scorn for the opera and its fans. It is
remarkable that despite such elitist masculine prejudices and political efforts
to shape Yue opera into a revolutionary theater, women’s Yue opera thrived
as a master theater of the love drama. Its aesthetics and narratives were
articulations of modern urban feminine aspirations that helped set the fash-
ion for popular entertainment in twentieth-century China. The opera was,
therefore, an expression of the rise of feminine power in Shanghai and in
Chinese society in general. 
Despite many differences, both women’s Yue opera and Western “chick
ﬂicks” (ﬁlms that appeal especially to women, often focusing on romance
or relationships) are energetic, melodramatic, urban, popular, and femi-
nine, and both have provoked unsettling feelings in elitist feminists as well
as in masculine mainstreamers. Moreover, both clearly symbolize the
growth of feminine power in public culture, a kind of self-authorized
female representation that embarrasses various (including feminist) ortho-
doxies and deﬁes simple deﬁnitions.
5 In Yue opera, as in chick ﬂicks, we
see women’s aspirations for the right to agency, independence, respect,
and love as autonomous human beings. Through the opera, Chinese
women refuted traditional misogynist views that subjugate them to men
while they simultaneously negotiated with the modern revolutionary rhet-
oric that subjects them to the nation. The main political and intellectual
discourses on women’s liberation criticized the feminine yin as being tra-
ditional (read “backward”), soft, weak, and small-minded and tried to sub-
ordinate women to the masculine yang nation-building causes, but the
women of Yue opera sought to rectify and lift the feminine as equal to
the masculine. In this way, the women of Yue opera used seemingly con-
ventional feminine values to challenge male dominance and to empower
themselves. 
The theory of performance and subject formation articulated by Judith
Butler is useful in explaining the construction of femininity in Yue opera.
As Butler argued when discussing the construction of “sex”:
Crucially, then, construction is neither a single act nor a causal process ini-
tiated by a subject and culminating in a set of ﬁxed effects. Construction
Conclusion    255

=== PDF PAGE 277 ===

not only takes place in time, but is itself a temporal process which operates
through the reiteration of norms; sex is both produced and destabilized in
the course of this reiteration. As a sedimented effect of a reiterative or rit-
ual practice, sex acquires its naturalized effect, and, yet, it is also by virtue
of this reiteration that gaps and ﬁssures are opened up as the constitutive
instabilities in such constructions, as that which escapes or exceeds the norm,
as that which cannot be wholly deﬁned or ﬁxed by the repetitive labor of
that norm. This instability is the deconstituting possibility in the very
process of repetition, the power that undoes the very effects by which “sex”
is stabilized, the possibility to put the consolidation of the norms of “sex”
into a potentially productive crisis.
6
Butler’s argument for the construction of “sex” as a performative process in
everyday life sheds light on how women could change gender norms while
seemingly acting to afﬁrm them. Instead of following the male elite’s denial
of feminine value, the women of Yue opera exercised considerable self-
authorization in exploring feminine aesthetics and women’s narratives in
the form of love drama. With the opera’s popular success, the women of
Yue opera helped establish private feelings and mundane experiences as
major themes in artistic representations of modern life, making the “fem-
inine” concerns of the everyday as important as the “masculine” public dis-
course of nationalism and modernity, as represented by spoken drama and
Beijing opera. Thus, the women of Yue opera advanced the modern process
of signiﬁcation of the feminine, making it equal to, yet still different from,
the masculine. 
The Revolution
This urban process, however, was met with the rural-based communist rev-
olution that came to dominance after 1949. To be sure, many different
forces helped shape Yue opera’s vicissitudes before the Communist Party’s
left-wing intervention of the late 1940s. Riding on the trends of indus-
trialization and urban in-migration, women’s Yue opera quickly established
itself in Shanghai in the 1930s and 1940s with the support of an emerg-
ing middle-class, especially female, audience, at a time when women’s edu-
cation and careers outside the home had already begun to change gender
mores. Yue opera’s rise in Shanghai can be understood only within these
urban-centered fundamental social and economical processes. 
Actresses’ struggle for survival and respect, however, converged with
256 Conclusion

=== PDF PAGE 278 ===

the left-wing program for social and gender equality, and their relation-
ship with the communist revolution was for the large part mutually beneﬁ-
cial. The CCP underground forces aided Yue opera actresses’ struggle in
the 1940s, and during the PRC period, the state elevated the status of
entertainers to engineers of the soul, admitted their representatives into
the new cultural and political elite, and made entertainment a lofty pro-
fession while providing ﬁnancial security for entertainers. Most actresses
welcomed the social changes brought about by the new state and sup-
ported it with their performances. Although the CCP cannot be credited
as the sole liberator of the suffering actresses, there should be no ques-
tion that the PRC state, and the communist revolution, had a positive
impact on the actress’s transformation from member of the underclass to
full member of society. 
The PRC state’s intervention in the arts, however, had more question-
able effects on the genre’s development. In restructuring the entertainment
business in the 1950s, the state pulled together intellectual and material
resources and produced a cluster of Yue opera masterpieces of love drama,
which boosted the opera’s national and international inﬂuence. This devel-
opment rested, however, on the artistic foundations laid by Yue opera
reforms of the 1940s and should not be credited solely to state interven-
tion. In the long run, the state’s ideological and administrative control of
art production was detrimental to Yue opera, and to performance art in gen-
eral, as it limited artists’ creativity and their ability to respond to their audi-
ences. As state control of art intensiﬁed during the Cultural Revolution,
allowing only one kind of revolutionary heroic art, art and entertainment
withered. Even when the state shifted to a laissez-faire policy during the
reform era that began in the 1980s, Yue opera and other native-opera gen-
res were not able to reclaim their dominant position in the entertainment
market. 
Neither Yue opera’s glorious achievements in the 1950s and 1960s nor
the genre’s waning popularity in recent decades was due entirely to the
PRC state, although in both cases, the state and the communist revolu-
tion were contributors. Several developments in the late twentieth cen-
tury sent Yue opera and other native operas into decline. First, a globalized
mass-entertainment culture captured the imaginations of younger gener-
ations after China reopened itself to Western inﬂuence in the 1980s. The
freshness of things Western seems to have rendered traditional art forms
obsolete in the minds of young people. Second, thanks to economic and
social development, there were no longer as many desperate people rely-
Conclusion    257

=== PDF PAGE 279 ===

ing on grassroots low-brow performances as a way of making a living.
Third, the Shanghai municipal government imposed regulations on free-
ﬂowing troupe formations and performances in an attempt to maintain min-
imal control over anti-government or pornographic revues. Thus, while
Yue opera continued to be part of the entertainment scene in Shanghai,
it was no longer as bustling as it had been in its golden period (1930s–
60s), when the opera rallied novel artistic imaginations and tremendous
youthful energies. 
Thus, the impact of the communist revolution on Yue opera, especially
the 1949 Liberation and the Cultural Revolution, is only of historical sig-
niﬁcance but is not historically signiﬁcant (to borrow a Joseph Levenson
expression) because it was not the decisive factor in the rise and decline
of Yue opera.
7 The communist revolution and the story of Yue opera are
better understood as two separate phenomena that interacted with each
other, both shaping and being shaped by fundamental historical transfor-
mations in social, economic, and political systems in twentieth-century
China. Moreover, in the long run, the urban-centered primordial moder-
nity, as reﬂected partly in Yue opera, is no less a revolution than the rural-
based grandiose communist movement. 
Periodization
Yue opera’s history, as a process separate from national revolution, sug-
gests a periodization different as well as independent from the division in
political history marked by the founding of the People’s Republic of China.
Until recently, the 1949 divide has been taken as a standard in modern
Chinese history, reﬂecting the tremendous impact of the regime change
on the lives of the Chinese people and on the international order. This
division, however, has been increasingly problematic since the 1990s, as
the People’s Republic became a subject of historical inquiry and as China
entered a post-revolution period amid the global post–Cold War period.
Reassessing the role of the communist revolution in China’s moderniza-
tion process, China scholars questioned the usefulness of the 1949 divide.
Political historian Nishimura Shigeo, for one, argued that the regime change
of 1949 did not interrupt the process of building a modern nation-state in
China.
8 William Kirby and his students pointed out, from an economic
history angle, continuities in the building of state-sponsored and state-con-
trolled large-scale industries across 1949.
9
258 Conclusion

=== PDF PAGE 280 ===

Similarly, Yue opera also shows continuities across 1949 in modern devel-
opments in cultural and social aspects, indicating the necessity of treating
the period between the 1920s and the 1980s as a coherent temporal frame-
work deﬁned by several particular social and cultural processes. Of primary
importance in this regard is the prominence of a public women’s culture
centered on Yue opera, a phenomenon that epitomized the contradictions
and conﬂicts in the rise of women in urban society. The Yue opera phe-
nomenon emerged during a period when the new gender ideology had just
begun to transform traditional gender praxis, hence the necessity for women
to carve out a separate space of their own in which their new experiences
in public life would be comfortable. The home base provided by women’s
Yue opera was an open space, and the actresses and female audiences were
highly visible ﬁgures who moved publicly in and out of theaters and pro-
duced various social dramas in the mass media. The cultural activism of
the women of Yue opera as a social/cultural group was unprecedented, and
it helped normalize women’s presence in social life and remake gender norms
in the city’s public culture. 
The trend of women going outside the family and into the public realm
in urban society received a big boost after 1949 when the state mobilized
women to join the workforce. The new state’s intervention further expanded
and legitimated women’s activism in the public domain, and the subsequent
Cultural Revolution pushed this trend to a climax. Partly because women
all over the country became increasingly active in public life, the popu-
larity of women’s Yue opera expanded beyond the city limits and became
a national phenomenon. However, having grown strong in conjunction with
the general trend of women’s entrance into social life, women’s Yue opera
began to lose its grip on younger women and rather suddenly lost popu-
larity in the 1980s, signifying the end to a phase in the cause of women’s
liberation, and a positive end it is. Younger generations of women, grow-
ing up in a society in which women performed public duty alongside men
and gender equality was the norm, no longer shared the experiences and
aspirations of their predecessors; they saw in Yue opera a women’s culture
that was outdated and embarrassing, which reminded them of women’s
lowly status in the past. 
More broadly, Yue opera’s history was part and parcel of the modern
transformation of popular entertainment in Shanghai that began in the
1930s and ran across 1949 and through the Cultural Revolution, despite
the increasingly dominant leftist radicalism of the early PRC period. This
Conclusion    259

=== PDF PAGE 281 ===

period, from 1949 to 1976, witnessed a revolutionary state pushing the entire
society into an all-around socialist transformation. The construction of a
socialist culture was of paramount importance in this ambitious plan, and
the socialist transformation of popular entertainment was a key element in
the state’s effort to disseminate its ideology to the grassroots. In 1951, the
state announced the policy of three transformations—which applied to
the entertainer, the structure of the industry, and the stage  performance—
and launched an all-out operatic reform campaign. The state’s effort to
gain full control of the entertainment industry culminated during the Cul-
tural Revolution, when the industry was allowed to offer only a dozen or
so state-approved theatrical productions. The radical ideology and praxis
of this period gave the impression of a total rupture in cultural develop-
ment. Interestingly, however, the perceived rupture may be viewed as an
extreme push in the same direction. Close examination of the situation
reveals that, underneath the surface of radical rhetoric and practice, sev-
eral threads of cultural modernity ran through the early PRC cultural
restructuring, including institutionalization, the push for professionalism,
and citizenry building.
10
Institutionalization in popular entertainment developed in two ways:
market self-ordering, through competition and negotiation, and government-
imposed regulation. Shanghai’s popular-entertainment market grew rap-
idly with the inﬂux of immigrants and the city’s expansion in the early
twentieth century. There was not, however, much institution building to
speak of up to the period of the War of Resistance against Japan because
local opera troupes were unstable in terms of formation and movement,
and the split sovereignty in semicolonial Shanghai compromised govern -
mental efforts to regulate the market. Real institution building took place
in the 1940s, especially after the end of World War II. As China regained
full control of the city and the foreign concessions were abolished, the
Nationalist Shanghai municipal government set out to regulate the enter-
tainment market. It issued a series of laws and regulations requiring per-
formance companies, theaters, and dance-hall entertainers to register with
the Social Affairs Bureau. The government also censored pornographic
and politically dangerous performances and attempted to control union-
ization in the industry. Meanwhile, through a process of ﬁerce competi-
tion and constant negotiation, the entertainment market matured and
stabilized; order began to emerge, with star troupes and performers
becoming established in various trades while the less successful were
pushed to the periphery. In the Yue opera trade, for example, a cluster of
260 Conclusion

=== PDF PAGE 282 ===

such superstars as the so-called nine sisters and ﬁve large companies (Xuesh-
eng, Fanghua, Yulan, Dongshan, and Shaozhuang) dominated the mar-
ket. Meanwhile, interest groups within the trade took advantage of the
government-directed union campaign and set up the Yue Opera Workers’
Union and the Yue Opera Employers’ Union in order to increase their power
through institution building. This trend of institutionalization continued
after 1949, refashioned completely within a framework of socialist ide-
ology and centrally planned culture. The thorough socialist reorganiza-
tion of the entertainment business represented radical measures of modern
institution building beyond political and ideological differences between
the Nationalists and the CCP. By the end of the Cultural Revolution, the
landscape of Shanghai’s entertainment industry had stabilized, albeit in
a socialist fashion, with regulated performance companies, venues, pro-
fessional organizations, and educational units as well as governmental
administrative organs. In the post–Cultural Revolution era, when the gov-
ernment saw the need to reinstate an entertainment market, the success-
ful institution building of the previous period made it much easier for the
government to open and control a market. The open market of popular
entertainment, in which spontaneous street performances and itinerant
troupes and performers moved freely, had become a memory of the “pre-
modern” past. 
Professionalism was another important aspect in the continuous process
of cultural modernization in the 1950s. Most important in this regard was
the development of a script-based, director-centered system in theatrical
production that gradually replaced the previous mode of production cen-
tered on actors’ unscripted improvisational performances. This process began
in the late 1930s and developed throughout the 1940s within local opera
troupes active in Shanghai. In the 1950s, the state sent professional script -
writers, directors, and stage designers to every opera troupe and made sure
that every production followed a standard procedure, starting from a com-
plete script that was actualized onstage under a director. This greatly
enhanced professionalism and modernized aesthetic standards in local
operas and led to a cluster of masterpieces in the early PRC period, includ-
ing the Yue operas Tale of the Western Chamber, Dream of the Red Chamber , and
Pursuing the Carp(Zhui yu); the Shanghai operasAn Antique Coinand The Slave
Mother (Wei nuli de muqin); and the Huai operasQin Xianglian (Qin Xiang-
lian) and The Blue Bridge (Lanqiao hui). The push for professionalism was so
strong that general improvement in the artistic quality of local-opera pro-
ductions was achieved at the cost of the actors’ creativity and their ability
Conclusion    261

=== PDF PAGE 283 ===

to give their roles individuality through idiomatic singing and acting. Today,
talented self-authorizing actors of the past are legendary ﬁgures, and improv-
isational performance has become a legacy of the premodern tradition of
native operas. 
Citizenry building was an integral part of modern China’s nation build-
ing and another aspect of the continuous development of a modern cul-
ture in the early PRC period. Despite political and ideological differences
between the Nationalists and the Communists, both worked to forge among
the people a sense of one nation and one people—an understanding of
the correlation between personal and national interests as well as the urge
to take on one’s duty to the nation. The Republican effort at citizenry build-
ing is easily identiﬁed in various versions of the New Life Movement, patri-
otic discourses against foreign invasions, and nationalistic rhetoric against
the warlords and the Communists. School education and the mass media
served as the primary channels for such construction. During the early PRC
period, however, the state made popular entertainment another important
venue, pushing the traditional idea of “education through entertainment”
(yu jiao yu le) to the limit. By means of a centrally planned culture, the rhet-
oric of revolutionary patriotism permeated all media and most theatrical
productions, helping to create a uniform socialist language for the nation’s
uniﬁed citizenry. Through the socialist transformation of stage perform-
ances and performers—two of the three transformations in 1950s oper-
atic reform—the new state not only made the lowly entertainers members
of the citizenry but moreover constructed an imagined national commu-
nity of citizens as reformed entertainers popularized state ideology through
the staging of socialist arts. This radical citizenry building reached its cli-
max during the Cultural Revolution, when revolutionary heroic arts encour-
aged citizens to work and die for the country. At the end of this period,
the idea of China (Zhongguo) and Chinese (Zhongguoren) had taken root
in the common people’s political consciousness and informed their identity
formation. 
The New Century
Around the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, Yue opera began to experi-
ence a small revival with a few well-received productions by the Shang-
hai Yue Opera House, including Stage Sisters in 1998, The Meilong T ownship
(Meilong zhen) in 2000, and The Butterﬂy Dreamin 2001 along with the spe-
262 Conclusion

=== PDF PAGE 284 ===

cial production of Dream of the Red Chamber for the Grand Theater in 1999.
This is part of a revival in the cultural market for performance art in Shang-
hai that began with the opening of the Grand Theater in 1998. Supported
by a powerful economic upturn in the 1990s, Shanghai once again aspires
to rebuild a cosmopolitan spirit and restore its leading position in making
culture. The Grand Theater and a group of landmark buildings, including
the Shanghai Museum and the Museum for Urban Planning, erected at the
center of the city around the People’s Square, symbolize this ambition. In
recent years, the Grand Theater has contracted with many international
companies as well as ﬁrst-rate troupes nationwide to perform on its stages,
and its calendar is nearly full year-round. Citywide, about two dozen ven-
ues feature a variety of performances ranging from acrobatic displays, com-
edy shows, Yue opera, Beijing opera, and dance, to pop, rock and Western
music concerts, Russian ballet, Irish folk dance, and Broadway musicals.
Yue opera was the ﬁrst among local operas to stage at the Grand Theater,
with the ever popular Dream of the Red Chamber, indicating that the genre has
retained much of its charm for many people in the city and around the nation.
Playing up the cultural aspirations of the city, Yue opera artists made it their
goal to restore the brand name “Shanghai Yue opera” nationwide. Between
2002 and 2006, the Shanghai Yue Opera House has accordingly organized
several well-publicized performance tours to Zhejiang, the southwest, the
northwest, and the northeastern regions showcasing a sophisticated mod-
ern urban culture as well as the special charm of women’s opera. 
The reform era has also witnessed a new wave of urbanization and urban
migration. As Shanghai becomes increasingly open to new immigrants,
many Zhejiang natives have once again found in Yue opera a desirable career
in the metropolis. This trend will continue into the conceivable future, since
the government has made urbanization a strategic goal for China’s devel-
opment in the decades to come. Thus, the same dynamics between the Zhe-
jiang countryside and Shanghai that supported the twentieth century’s Yue
opera boom in Shanghai are once again working to revitalize the opera
(see ﬁgs. 7 .1, 7 .2). 
Moreover, economic development in the past quarter century created
a sizable population of young professionals and entrepreneurs in the city,
many of whom are women. Contemporary female fans of Yue opera are
found not only in theaters but also on the Internet. College students and
white-collar workers have created at least two dozen Web sites devoted to
Yue opera in general or to speciﬁc leading actresses. One such Web site,
Conclusion    263

=== PDF PAGE 285 ===

Shan Yangping Forum (Yangping Luntan), a lively chat board devoted to
the beautiful actress Shan Yangping, is ﬁlled with young women’s unre-
strained expressions of love for her and for one another as Shan fans.
11
Another Web site devoted to the handsome male impersonator Qian Huili
is similarly ﬁlled with young women’s confessions of love for their idol.
12
This group of well-educated fans, like those of the past, is the most vocal
and visible group among all Yue opera fans, but the majority of the Yue
opera audience is still composed of middle-aged women. It remains to be
seen whether Yue opera will be able to expand its inﬂuence among this
younger group and how the new generation of Yue opera fans and actresses
will shape Yue opera (see ﬁg. 7 .3). 
At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, women’s Yue opera is
enjoying a small revival, and not much seems to have changed: the same
264 Conclusion
7 .1  A middle-aged Yue opera fan rehearses 
at a party at Xiao-Bai Yumei’s residence, 1996.
(Photo by the author)

=== PDF PAGE 286 ===

patterns of love drama persist, and the opera has never tired of telling
women’s narratives presented in exquisite feminine aesthetics to a pre-
dominantly female audience. Relationships between audiences and stars
also remain more or less the same: fans fall in love with their idols because
of both artistic and sexual attraction. Adoptive mother-daughter relation -
ships are no longer as formal and ostentatious as before, yet it is common
knowledge within Yue opera circles that most leading actresses have spe-
cial patrons, mostly overseas Chinese businesswomen and businessmen.
The most obvious difference is the changing status of Yue opera actresses.
Conclusion    265
7 .2  A young Yue opera fan learns to perform at a party at
Xiao-Bai Yumei’s residence, 1996. (Photo by the author)

=== PDF PAGE 287 ===

The old stigma attached to female entertainers belongs ﬁrmly in the past,
and for Yue opera performers today, acting not only represents job secu-
rity but also is a respected profession that provides fame and celebrity sta-
tus for the stars. 
Thus, the social and economic processes that once supported Yue opera
seem to have been revived in the last quarter century of the reform era.
Especially since the 1990s, Shanghai has once again emerged as the cen-
ter of China’s modern economy. A new middle class is developing as immi-
grants ﬂow into the city, and female white-collar workers symbolize the
new women of Shanghai. The question is, Will women’s Yue opera thrive
once again in the new century? 
266 Conclusion
7 .3  The Yifu Tianchan Theater, a major stage for native-opera performances 
in contemporary Shanghai. (Yue yuan shen yun 2001)

=== PDF PAGE 288 ===

The answer is probably negative, for the social context is very different
from that of the early twentieth century. During the ﬁrst four decades of
the People’s Republic, Shanghai grew into a huge residential city, with older
generations of settlers becoming Shanghainese and the newcomers being
shaped by the city rather than shaping it. At the same time, society has
become so open to women that women in Shanghai no longer need Yue
opera to help broaden their social horizons. In short, members of the new
bourgeoisie in Shanghai have found less sociological and emotional con-
nection with the opera, although they may deem it aesthetically and per-
haps sexually attractive. As Yue opera makes itself a permanent feature of
Shanghai’s cultural scene, it no longer has the glamour and popularity of
its heyday, as popular-culture preferences have shifted to a globalized mass
entertainment represented by domestic and international rock and popular-
music stars and, most recently, such pop-culture representatives as Chi-
nese rappers. Thus, although Yue opera will continue to be a highly
developed art form in the city’s entertainment scene, it is no longer an impor-
tant social phenomenon. 
In today’s China, when native operas are reduced mostly to relying on
government subsidies in order to survive, Yue opera has joined Beijing
opera as a representative of China’s living cultural tradition. Both operas,
however, still claim the loyalty of a small segment of the population made
up mostly of the middle aged and elderly. The divide along gender lines
between Beijing opera and Yue opera, in terms of content, style, and audi-
ence, is still apparent. Yue opera continues to produce love dramas, while
Beijing opera retains its focus on grand imperial or nation-state narratives.
This is evident in several new productions by the Shanghai Beijing Opera
House, such as Cao Cao and Yang Xiu (Cao Cao yu Yang Xiu) and The Pros-
perous Reign of the Taizong Emperor (Zhenguan shengshi). In Lu Xun Park, in
northeastern Shanghai, on a sunny weekend, coteries of Yue opera fans,
mostly retired women, gather at the pavilion on top of the hill and rehearse
their favorite pieces; down the hill, across the lake, Beijing opera fans, mostly
elderly men, get together at the corridor and entertain themselves by singing
well-known pieces. Beijing opera and Yue opera, the products of two dif-
ferently gendered cultures in two different eras, have left deep marks on
China’s history and, as living traditions, continue to offer entertainment
for the population and inspiration for artists around the world. 
Conclusion    267

=== PDF PAGE 289 ===



=== PDF PAGE 290 ===

269
Appendix
Interviews and Informants
Birth 
Name Sex Date Occupation Place Time Method
Chen F 1920 Radio announcer Shanghai Dec. 6, 1995 Tape
Shulian
陳/uni吳58灘/uni84ee
Cheng F 1943 Yue opera fan New York June 21, 2002 Notes
Liping
/uni62吳灘/uni吳ac女/uni5e吳3
Cheng F Yue opera fans New York July 13, 2002 Notes
Liping, (group interview)
Li Jiang F 1948
/uni6吳4e/uni6c5灘,
Zheng F 1941
Yinyin
/uni9由2d銀銀
Su Jinzou M 
Cheng F 1922 Yue opera Shanghai Nov. 9, Dec. Tape
Rong scriptwriter 5, 1995
成/uni5女女9 Telephone* Mar. 29, Notes
May–July 2002
Dai M 1927 Yue opera agent Shanghai June 13, July Notes
Xinghuang and administrator 2001
戴/uni884c/uni吳由4c

=== PDF PAGE 291 ===

270 Appendix
Birth 
Name Sex Date Occupation Place Time Method
Ding M 1920 Writer and PRC Shanghai Feb. 9, 1996 Tape
Jingtang ofﬁcial
/uni4e0由/uni666灘唐
Fu  F 1923 Yue opera actress Shanghai Dec. 26, 1995 Tape
Quanxiang
傅全香
Han Yi M 1922 Yue opera stage Shanghai June 1, 5, Tape
/uni9吳d3/uni吳灘a9designer, director, 2002
and scriptwriter Telephone* Sept. 16,  Notes
Nov. 25,  
Dec. 28, 2002
Li Taicheng M 1921 PRC ofﬁcial Shanghai Feb. 15, 1996 Notes
/uni6吳4e/uni592a成
Lu Shijun M 1935 Yue opera actor Shanghai Jan. 19, 1996; Notes
/uni吳6e吳時/uni4灘caand researcher June 28, 2001
Qian Huili F 1963 Yue opera actress Telephone* Dec. 26, 2002 Notes
錢/uni60e0/uni9e9吳
Qiu Yawei M 1932 Taipei Shengxian  Taipei Aug. 10, 1996 Tape
/uni88d8/uni4e9e/uni885女Native-Place 
Organization
Qiu M 1935 activists and Yue 
Wenguang opera researchers
/uni88d8文光 (group interview)
Shan F 1962 Yue opera actress Telephone* Dec. 29, Notes
Yangping 2002; Jan. 14,
/uni55ae/uni4e灘0/uni840d 2003
Su Jinzou M 1941 Yue opera music New York July 13, 2002 Notes
蘇進鄒 writer

=== PDF PAGE 292 ===

Birth 
Name Sex Date Occupation Place Time Method
Teng  F 1916 Yue opera Shanghai Jan. 29, 1996 Tape
Jiazhen audience members 
/uni6ed5/uni5女女6/uni632灘,(couples)
Song M 1910
Zhiyou
/uni5女8女/uni4e4女由
Wang F 1966 Yue opera actress Telephone* June 8, 2003 Notes
Zhiping
/uni吳38女/uni5灘d吳/uni840d
Wei M 1922 Writer Shanghai Jan. 7, 11, 1996 Tape
Shaochang 
/uni9女4灘/uni吳d39/uni660c
Wu Ping F 1936 Yue opera fan Shanghai Jan. 28, 1996 Tape
吳/uni840d
Wu Xiaolou F 1926 Yue opera actress Shanghai Jan. 10, 1996 Tape
吳/uni5c0灘/uni6a由3
Wu Yanli F 1923 Yue opera Taipei Aug. 11, 1996 Tape
吳/uni吳由d5/uni9e9吳,actresses
Gao Jin F 1941 (group interview)
/uni9ad8/uni吳4吳e
Wu F 1937 Yue opera Telephone* June 4, 2003 Notes
Zhaofen scriptwriter
吳兆/uni82ac
Xiao-Bai F 1921 Yue opera actress Shanghai Dec. 28, Tape
Yumei 1995; Jan. 30, 
/uni5c0灘/uni吳6吳d玉梅 1996
Xu F 1921 Yue opera actress Shanghai Dec. 27, 1995 Tape
Yulan 
/uni5灘90玉/uni862d
Appendix    271

=== PDF PAGE 293 ===

Birth 
Name Sex Date Occupation Place Time Method
Xue M 1938 Yue opera Telephone* Dec. 22, Notes
Yunhuang scriptwriter 2002;
/uni859女允/uni吳49c Jan. 5, 2003
Yuan F 1922 Yue opera actress Shanghai Dec. 23, 1995; Tape
Xuefen Telephone* May 30, Notes
袁/uni96ea/uni82ac 2002;
Jan. 1, 2003
Zhang M 1913 Yue opera actor Chongren, Nov. 24, 1995 Tape
Rongbiao Shengxian, 
/uni5灘35/uni69ae/uni6a由9Zhejiang
Zhang F 1923? Yue opera actress
Yanqiu (couples)
/uni5灘35/uni8c54/uni吳9c女
Zhang  M 1918 Board member, Taipei Aug. 10, 1996 Tape
Xingzhou Taipei Ningbo
/uni5灘35/uni884c周Native-Place 
Association
Wang M 1915 Chairman of the 
Xiongfu Board, Taipei
/uni吳38女/uni96c4/uni吳52女Ningbo Native-
Place Association
(group interview)
Zheng F 1928 Yue opera actress Shanghai Nov. 13, 1995 Tape
Zhongmei 
/uni9由2d/uni5灘e0梅
Zhou F 1920 Yue opera actress Shanghai Jan. 13, 1996 Tape
Baokui
周/uni5女灘6/uni594e
272 Appendix

=== PDF PAGE 294 ===

Birth 
Name Sex Date Occupation Place Time Method
Zhu F 1923 Yue opera actress Shanghai Nov. 13, 1995 Tape
Juxiang
/uni吳a灘a/uni83ca香,
Zhou M 1912 Yue opera 
Baocai musician 
周/uni5女灘6/uni8ca由(couples)
*Telephone interview, New York to Shanghai
Appendix    273

=== PDF PAGE 295 ===



=== PDF PAGE 296 ===

275
Notes
Preface
1. As Wendy Larson argues in her study of modern China’s women writers. Larson
1998. 
2. Fuller 1980, 235. 
3. Hall 1980. 
Introduction: Opera, Gender, and the City 
1. “Mandarin ducks and butterﬂies” ﬁction is a subgenre in Republican period popu-
lar literature that focuses on love stories. At ﬁrst, the term was pejorative and referred
particularly to love stories written in classical Chinese in the 1910s and early 1920s; even-
tually, it came to refer to all popular love stories of the Republican period. 
2. Link 1981; Wei 1962, 1984, 1990; Wang Dewei 1988; Zhang Gansheng 1991; Yang
Yi 1993; Wu 1995; Pickowicz 1993; Yingjin Zhang 1996; Lee 1999; and Poshek Fu 
2003. 
3. Furth 1999; Mann 1997; Hershatter 1997; and Ko 1994.
4. Frith 1988. 
5. The other important form of popular entertainment comprised local storytelling
genres, akin to local operas in the sense that both were grounded in local dialects.
6. For example, the authoritative Dictionary of Chinese Opera Genres (Zhongguo xiqu
juzhong da cidian), published in 1995, lists 335 genres that existed in the past 150 years
up to 1985. Zhongguo xiqu da cidian, 1995.
7 . For Beijing opera, Shanghai Jingju zhi1999; for Huai opera,Shanghai Huaiju zhi 1998;
for Shanghai opera, Shanghai Huju zhi 1999; and for Yue opera, Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997 . 
8. Gao 1991; and Ying 2003.
9. In a more general sense, I have beneﬁted from reading a wide range of scholarship

=== PDF PAGE 297 ===

on Chinese opera. In Japan, there are some very interesting studies of Chinese operas,
such as those by scholars Tanaka Issei and O¯ ki Yasushi. See Tanaka 1985 and O¯ ki 1989.
Although I occasionally draw on these works, I do not attempt to discuss these studies
here mainly because most are concerned primarily with operas in history, while my focus
is cultural history manifested in one particular opera.
A small number of works of history and comparative literature have recognized, to
varying degrees, the importance of studying local operas as a means of gaining access
to popular mentality and sociality in China. In his study of the Boxers, Esherick astutely
noted the ways in which rebel heroes from opera repertoires provided local peasants with
role models, as well as the inspiration to rebel, in a time of crisis (Esherick 1987), while
Mackerras devoted a book to the social organizations of Beijing opera in the late eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries (Mackerras 1972). 
There is also a group of important articles scattered in various journals and collec-
tions, including Tanaka, “The Social and Historical Context of Ming-Ch’ing Local Drama”
(1985); Ward, “Regional Operas and Their Audiences” (1985); Arkush, “Love and Mar-
riage in North Chinese Peasant Operas” (1989); Bensen, “The Manipulation of Tanci in
Radio Shanghai during the 1930s” (1995); Stock, “Huju and Musical Change” (1997);
and Bender, “Shifting and Performance in Suzhou Chantefable” (1999). 
Other modern scholars of Chinese culture and society have studied the Chinese elite’s
use of opera as a means of transmitting elite messages; see, for example, Hsiao-T’i Li,
“Opera, Society, and Politics” (1996), and Hayford, T o the People(1990), 127–32. Rebecca
Karl used the case of Jingju reform in Shanghai in the 1900s to illustrate features of Chi-
nese nationalism in the late Qing in Staging the World(2002), while Joshua Goldstein dis-
cussed the “nationalization” of Beijing opera in the Republican period in “Theatrical
Imagi-nations” (1999a) and “Mei Lanfang and the Nationalization of Peking Opera, 1912–
1930” (1999b).
10. My background as a Shanghai native made my investigations much smoother,
as my interviews with Yue opera actresses and audience members were all conducted in
various Shanghai versions of the Wu dialect of the Jiangnan region, which includes the
northern part of Zhejiang, part of Jiangsu south of the Yangzi River, and Shanghai. My
conversations with the Yue opera fan Li Jiang, from Beijing, were an exception, since she
does not speak the Wu dialect although she understands it through her appreciation of
Yue opera.
11. For research on the foreign settlements in Shanghai, see Xu and Qiu 1933; and
Shanghai gonggong zujie shigao1980. A classic work on Shanghai’s development as a treaty-
port city and its role in China’s economic modernization is Murphey 1953.
12. Chen Zhengxiang 1970.
13. Tang 1989.
14. A 1996 exhibition of Republican posters in Shanghai included a picture of the
movie star Li Lihua wearing a cheongsam made of mandarin blue cloth. A caption signed
by Li reads: “Mandarin blue cloth is my favorite material for a dress” (Liujin suiyue 1996).
276 Notes to Pages 9–11

=== PDF PAGE 298 ===

Another example pictured in Leo Lee’s Shanghai Modernshows the movie star Ruan Lingyu
in a mandarin blue cheongsam on the cover of the popular Young Companion Pictorial
(Liangyou huabao), published in Shanghai in the 1930s and 1940s. See Lee 1999.
15. Zhang Gansheng 1991.
16. For a detailed discussion, see ibid. See also Link 1981.
17 . Zhou Shoujuan, “Chatting about Saturday,” quoted in Zheng Yimei 1987 . Satur-
day was published from June 1914 to April 1916 and from March 1921 to February 1923.
18. Zhang Ailing 1943. Also in Zhang Ailing 1945, 56.
19. The hierarchy of theaters, audiences, and opera genres and troupes is discussed
in detail in chapter 3.
20. For a detailed discussion of the connections among various popular-entertain-
ment forms and popular literature, see Wei 1990, 264–71. For example, Wei wrote: “‘Man-
darin ducks and butterﬂies’–style ﬁction and authors were ﬁrst staged in civil drama
[wenmingxi]. Bao Tianxiao’s The Fall of the Plum Blossom [Meihua luo] and Orchid in a Deserted
Valley [Konggu lan] were staged by the Shanghai New Citizen Society in March 1914.
Zhou Shoujuan published a review in Shanghai Newspaper [Shen bao], and even partici-
pated in the performance himself. Early ﬁlm was in fact civil drama plays on screen. The
three tycoon directors of the Mingxing Studio—Zhang Shichuan, Zheng Zhengqiu,
and Zhou Jianyun—all had experience with civil drama. Actors of silent feature ﬁlms
produced in the early 1920s were almost all from civil-drama companies. During the
middle and later years of the 1920s, many ‘mandarin ducks and butterﬂies’ ﬁction master -
works were made into ﬁlms, including Spirit of the Jade Pear [Yulihun], The Tide of Guang ling
[Guangling chao], Fantastic Marriage Bond [Xiafeng qiyuan], Orchid in a Deserted Valley, The
Fall of Plum Blossom, and Flame on Honglian Monastery [Huoshao Honglian Si].”
21. For one example, see Ma Weishi 1935.
22. “New drama” was also known as “civil drama” ( wenmingxi).
23. Huayan Yigai, “All about Tears and Laughter.” Quoted in Wei 1990, 103–4.
24. Yang Yi 1993, 335. The concept of Haipai, or Shanghai-style, culture is elusive and
difﬁcult to deﬁne, and much has been said about it since the 1930s when some Beijing-
based elite writers led by Shen Congwen criticized the commercialization of Shanghai
writers such as Shao Xunmei, Mu Shiying, and Shi Zhecun, labeling them “Haipai” writ-
ers. The term then became a pejorative description of things and styles of commercial-
ized Shanghai until after the Cultural Revolution. In recent decades, with the rapid economic
development of the city, the term “Haipai” has gained more prestige than it ever enjoyed,
and a few serious scholarly works appeared to rectify Shanghai-style culture. For recent
discussions on Shanghai-style literature and the Beijing-Shanghai debate in the 1930s, see
Wu Fuhui 1995. Hanchao Lu also brieﬂy discusses Shanghai style and its commercial, mod-
ern characteristics in comparison with “Beijing style” (Jingpai) as a more conservative, hin-
terland culture of China. See Hanchao Lu 1995. Other important works on the topic include
Yang Dongping 1994; Yang Yi 1993; and Zhang Gansheng 1991.
25. Pickowicz 1993, 301. For Brooks’s ideas on melodrama, referenced by Pickowicz,
Notes to Pages 11–14    277

=== PDF PAGE 299 ===

see Peter Brooks, The Melodramatic Imagination: Balzac, Henry James, Melodrama, and the Mode
of Excess (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985).
26. Pickowicz 1993, 301.
27 . Link 1981, 8.
28. Ibid., 9.
29. Leo Lee has a passing discussion of this concept in his Shanghai Modern. See Lee
1999.
30. Li Zhi was the most prominent spokesperson for gender equality and intellectual-
spiritual freedom within the Taizhou School. See Jin Jiang 2001. 
31. For an English-language study of the scholar-beauty ﬁction of the seventeenth
century, see Qingping Wang 1998.
32. Sometimes, parents also lived with the family. But unlike the traditional multi-
generational, multifamily household, although grandparents could still live with a fam-
ily, they were not the head of the household. In 1947, the average size of a Shanghai
household was ﬁve, which was standard for Shanghai’s nuclear or extended families. Chen
Zhengxiang 1970.
33. Xu Dafeng 1939.
34. Pickowicz 1993.
35. Quoted in Gao Yilong 1991, 65.
36. Wang Changnian 1947, 202–11.
37 . The population of “island” Shanghai tripled. Before the war broke out in 1937, the
population in the foreign settlements was about 167 million, and it reached more than
4 million in late 1938 and 5 million in the early 1940s. See Shen, Jiang, and Zheng 1996,
120.
38. By the end of the war, Shanghai’s population had dropped to around 300 million;
it began to rise again after the war and reached 337 million by the end of 1945. See Chen
Zhengxiang 1970.
39. Chen Qingsheng 1995; Ke 1994.
40. On intellectual attitudes toward the Japanese occupation, see Poshek Fu 1993. 
41. See Gaimush¯o k¯obun, no. 52189 (April 1, 1941) and no. 24719 (July 27, 1939). 
42. See Ke 1994; and Tao Juyin 1979.
43. For example, Lu Xun’s widow Xu Guangping and the left-wing intellectual Ke Ling
were arrested and tortured by occupation forces.
44. Gaimush¯o k¯obun, no. 55955 (July 17, 1942) and no. 56270 (July 28, 1942).
45. For a discussion of the wartime cinema in Shanghai, see Poshek Fu 2003. Also see
Liu Qikui 1987 for discussions on cultural activities led by the Wang Jingwei collabora-
tion government in wartime Shanghai.
46. Many critics as well as the political and intellectual elite interpret this saddened
sensibility as a revival of the “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies” style of literature. My read-
ing suggests, however, that wartime literature represents a deepened modern urban aes-
thetic more articulate than its “butterﬂies” predecessors and more grounded than that of
the Modernists in the 1930s. For discussions on the “butterﬂies” style of spoken drama
278 Notes to Pages 14–21

=== PDF PAGE 300 ===

in “island” Shanghai, see Zong Fei 1940; on the “butterﬂies” style of ﬁlm, see Bai Mao
1940; and on the “butterﬂies” style of literature, drama, and ﬁlm in occupied Shanghai,
see She Ren 1943.
47 . Women’s Yue opera enlisted popular writers, including Yan Duhe and Zhou Shou-
juan, to support and help establish its status in the city’s booming popular-culture mar-
ket. A chronicle of events reported in the tabloid The Song of Yue (Yue ou), for example,
hints at the interaction between Yue opera actresses and writers of romantic ﬁction. On
May 24, 1939, well-known drama critics attended Yao Shuijuan’s performance of
Embroidering the Mandarin Ducks(Xiu yuanyang). On May 31, “Shanghai’s artists and drama
critics, including Yan Duhe, Zhou Shoujuan, Wu Chengda, Huang Jiping, Luo Quyuan,
Huang Yuzhai, and Master of the Plum Blossom House [Meihua Guanzhu], presented
at the Tianxiang Theater and watched Yao Shuijuan’s Emerald Hairpin [Biyu zan].” “In
June,” the tabloid reports, “Ma Zhanghua invited journalists for a banquet at Da Jiali
Restaurant. With Mr. Fan Jugao invited on behalf of Ma Zhanghua, Misters Zhou Shou-
juan, Hu Hanzhu, Wang Xuechen, Chen Xiaodie, Master of the Plum Blossom House,
She Yu, Chen Chanweng, and Xu Zhuoai were in attendance.” See Yue ou, vol. 1 (July 1,
1939).
48. While Zhang Ailing created a variety of female characters in her best-selling ﬁction,
Su Qing, the period’s foremost feminist writer, published two best-sellers in 1944: Ten
Years of My Married Life (Jiehun shinian), an autobiographical novel describing the col-
lapse of her marriage, and A Collection of Essays from Huanjin (Huanjin ji), which includes
numerous essays reﬂecting on her life and related women’s issues. In late 1942, Su Qing
began publishing one of the period’s most successful literary magazines, Heaven and Earth
(Tiandi), which carried articles about women, men, love, marriage, family, women’s rights,
men’s attitudes, food, housing, and travel. In 1944, Miscellany (Zazhi), a best-selling lit-
erary periodical, organized and later published a roundtable discussion by female writ-
ers, including Su Qing and Zhang Ailing. In March 1945, Miscellanyfeatured a conversation
between Zhang Ailing and Su Qing about women, family, and marriage. Zazhi, vol. 13,
no. 6 (March 1944), and vol. 14, no. 6 (March 1945). For studies of women writers of
the period, see Nicole Huang 1995; and Hamada 1993.
49. Su Qing 1944a, 1–4. Also in Su Qing 1995, 503–6.
50. Zazhi, vol. 13, no. 1 (April 10, 1944), 53.
51. Susan Glosser discusses the changing discourses of women and family in Repub-
lican China in Chinese Visions of Family and State, 1915–1953 (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 2003). 
52. Zhang Ailing, “Huali Yuan,” 1947 . See Zhang Ailing 2006, 147–58.
53. Su Qing became a professional Yue opera playwright in the 1950s and created
many Yue opera plays. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 342–43. 
54. As described in MacPherson 1998; and Zheng Wang 1999. 
55. Jingu qiguan is a collection of stories handed down in the storytelling tradition
of the late Ming dynasty. Compiled by Baoweng Laoren from Gusu (present-day
Suzhou).
Notes to Pages 21–23    279

=== PDF PAGE 301 ===

56. Zhang Ailing 1944. Quoted in Wei 1990, 35–36.
57 . Tao Lanying 1943.
58. Hanchao Lu 1999; Hershatter 1997; Henriot 2001; Honig 1986, 1993; Mann 1994;
Goodman 1995; Wakeman 1995; Lee 1999; Jones 2001; and Perry 1993.
1. The Origins of Yue Opera
1. The cult of qing prevailed in late Ming and early Qing intellectual discourse. See
Ko 1994. 
2. See Wang Xiaochuan 1958. 
3. Ko, in her story about a late Ming woman poet, Huang Yuanjie, provides a suc-
cinct discussion of a pair of “age-old attributes for women: respectable/mean, deﬁned
according to a woman’s distance from the family system.” See Ko 1994, 119–23. 
4. See Lu Xun’s recollections of going to opera shows when he was a child visiting
his grandmother in the Shaoxing countryside. Lu Xun 1922. 
5. While the origins of the practice remain obscure, it is common knowledge that
this had been the general practice since the eighteenth century. See Qi Rushan 1964,
vol. 2: 7 . Evidence indicates that there were some exceptions in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. First, women began to appear in opera theaters as both per-
formers and spectators in foreign settlements in treaty-port cities such as Shanghai and
Tianjin in the late nineteenth century. Second, in the couple of years immediately after
the Allied occupation of Beijing following the Boxer Rebellion in 1900, theaters in Bei-
jing admitted women spectators in designated areas. And it is also possible that a few
prestigious women might be admitted to semicommercial performances held in native-
place facilities in urban centers. 
6. Wang Xiaochuan 1958. 
7 . Private female troupes of rich household and inner court actresses were still allowed,
but they were not involved in public commercial performances. 
8. See Sun and Xu 1995; and Mackerras 1972. 
9. Pi stands for xipi, and huang stands for erhuang—two local melodies from the area
where Hubei, Jiangxi, and Anhui meet. 
10. “Laolangmiao beiji” (Tablet of Laolang Temple) in Suzhou. Jiangsu shen Ming-Qing
yilai beike ziliao xuanji (A collection of stone inscriptions in Jiangsu since the Ming and
Qing dynasties). Quoted in Sun and Xu 1995. 
11. Time and again, the Manchu court had banned Manchu ofﬁcials from being
involved with opera and opera performers. But these bans never seemed to last long, and
the Manchu court was often the most generous patron of popular opera. 
12. See Qi Rushan, “Tongzhi hou wushi nianjian Beiping hengyan jumu” (A list of
plays often staged during the ﬁfty years after 1883). In Qi Rushan 1964, vol. 4. The
last three are stories from the popular Ming novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms (Sanguo
yanyi). 
13. Chinese opera scholars have done a great deal of research on numerous local operas
280 Notes to Pages 23–30

=== PDF PAGE 302 ===

and their histories in the past two decades, including Wang Lin’s work on ping opera in
Tianjin (Wang Lin 1991), the work on Hebei clapper opera by Ma Longwen and Mao
Dazhi (Ma and Mao 1982), Zeng Yongyi’s work on boy-singers’ opera in Taiwan and
Fujian (Zeng 1988), and Luo Di’s work on opera and Zhejiang (Luo Di 1991). Japanese
and Western scholarship on Chinese opera and opera history has focused largely on Bei-
jing opera and paid very little attention to other local operas and even less to folk operas.
Except for a small number of articles and chapters, I am not aware of substantial research
on the history of minor operas and local major operas other than Beijing opera outside
Mainland China and Taiwan. Drawing on the example of Shengxian little opera, the fore-
runner of Yue opera, and an extensive reading of scholarly works in Chinese on various
minor operas, I offer an overview of the origins and growth of minor operas in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. 
14. For dictionary deﬁnitions of daxi and xiaoxi, see Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian1981, 68. 
15. For studies of pingopera and boy-singers’ opera, see Hu Sha 1982; Wang Lin 1991;
and Zeng Yongyi 1988. 
16. On the transformation of yangge from a folk art to a modern drama in the 1940s
in Shaanxi and other parts of the north, see Jack Chen 1949. For a discussion of yangge
in Dingxian, Hebei, in the 1920s, which also describes some characteristics of xiaoxi,
although the author seems unaware of this term, see Arkush 1989. 
17 . See Zhang Jishun 1992a. 
18. Zhang Jishun 1992b. 
19. On the ofﬁcial prohibition of minor operas, see Wang Xiaochuan 1958. 
20. Qi Rushan, “Xijie xiao zhanggu” (Anecdotes of the opera circle). In Qi Rushan
1964, vol. 4: 86–88. 
21. Mei Lanfang 1954, 128. 
22. For details about Mei Lanfang’s reforms, see Mei Lanfang 1954, 221; also see Xu
Chengbei 1990. 
23. Sanshiliu Yuanyang Guanzhu, “Ziyou lianai Zhuo Wenjun” (The free-love Zhuo
Wenjun). In Xu Hansheng 1935, 8. 
24. Zhang Dezhi, “Wo suo renshi de Cheng Yanqiu” (My understanding of Cheng
Yanqiu). In Cheng Yanqiu zhuanji1938. 
25. See Xiqu jingying 1989, vol. 1; and Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian 1981. 
26. Mei Baojiu, the son of master Mei Lanfang, may be the only exception, as the
PRC government strongly supported Mei Lanfang’s desire to see his art carried on by his
son. Brief information about these early female performers can be found in Zhongguo xiqu
quyi cidian 1981. 
27 . Zhongguo xiqu juzhong da cidian1995, 129–34, 44–54, 455–63. 
28. Ibid., 18–19, 379–81, 129–34, 44–54, 455–63. 
29. Ibid., 882–83, 1058–59, 1092–93. After 1949, as the PRC government devoted
considerable energy and resources to salvaging disappearing Qing major operas, Beijing
opera continued to enjoy its high political and cultural status, but it, too, survived only
on government subsidies after the 1950s. 
Notes to Pages 30–36    281

=== PDF PAGE 303 ===

30. “Didu” was a phonetic imitation of the beep produced by knocking a small stick
at a piece of wood to keep the rhythm for singing and acting in Shengxian little opera. 
31. Xiao Wo, “Shaoxing diduban de jiantao” (A critique of diduopera from Shaoxing).
In “Shaoxing shangbao” liangzhounian jinian tekan (A special issue for the second anniversary
of Shaoxing shangbao), October 1935. 
32. Yue ou, vol. 1 (July 1, 1939). 
33. For more on ping opera, see Wang Lin 1991; and Hu Sha 1982. 
34. Ma Chaoshui 1960. 
35. Zhang Jishun 1992a. 
36. In the sigongscale system, the primary key area is around the sixth and third notes
of the scale, somewhat similar to A major in the Western system. 
37 . Ren Wensi 1992. 
38. See Ma Chaoshui 1960. 
39. Ibid. 
40. Ma Chaoshui 1960; and Ren Wensi 1992. 
41. Ma Chaoshui 1960. 
42. Ma Chaoshui 1960; and Ren Wensi 1992. 
43. Zhang Jishun 1992a. 
44. Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi1983, 31. For more examples of stories about peasant life, see
Zhang Jishun 1992a. 
45. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 135. 
46. For a discussion of “precious volumes” (baojuan) and women’s relationship to them,
see Overmyer 1985. 
47 . Ding Yi 1992a. Also seeZaoqi Yueju fazhan shi 1983. 
48. Ma Chaoshui 1960, 6. 
49. Ibid., 7 . 
50. For a study of this elite idea, see Hsiao-T’i Li 1996. 
51. Ma Chaoshui 1960, 5–6. 
52. Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi 1983, 48. 
53. Ibid. 
54. Ma Chaoshui 1960. 
55. Ibid. 
56. Ibid. Also see Qian Yonglin 1992; and Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi 1983. 
57 . For details, see Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi1983. 
58. Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai has been known internationally as The Butterﬂy Lovers
since the 1950s, after the Yue opera play’s international tour and the release of the color
ﬁlm of the same title in 1953. 
59. She Huimin 1992. 
60. Ma Chaoshui 1960. 
61. She Huimin 1992. 
62. This discussion of the butterﬂy story draws upon a variety of opera and story-
282 Notes to Pages 37–48

=== PDF PAGE 304 ===

telling scripts. See these titles, which all begin with “Liang Shanbo,” in the references
section. 
63. Lu Gong and Ding Yi believe that the tale is in Zhang Du’s Collections of the Xuan-
shi Studio (Xuanshi zhi), of the Tang dynasty. I cannot ﬁnd the tale in that book and sus-
pect the record may have a later date. The story, however, does make sense. Minister
Xie An, a native of Shangyu, retired to his hometown, which was only seven miles away
from the Zhu Family Village. Xie was known for teaching literature to his niece, the famous
poet Xie Daoyun, which might explain Xie An’s interest in the legend of Zhu Yingtai.
See Lu Gong 1955, 10; and Ding Yi 1992b. 
64. See Lu Gong 1955, 10–11. 
65. Early versions of the play were based on the Buddhist idea of retribution and rein-
carnation, a framework inherited from oral traditions within folk culture. Liang Shanbo
and Zhu Yingtai, as the play and other folk traditions had it, were in fact reincarnations
of Golden Boy and Jade Girl, who served the Jade Emperor in his heavenly court. The
two had fallen in love with each other at a party given by the Heavenly Empress (Wangmu
Niangniang) and had accidentally broken the Glazed Cup. The angry Jade Emperor pun-
ished them by sending them down to suffer three lives on earth (in some versions, they
have seven lives), separated from each other and devastated by lovesickness. According
to this framework, Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai were the last incarnations of Golden
Boy and Jade Girl. After Zhu Yingtai and Ma Wencai jump into Liang Shanbo’s grave,
the three take their dispute to the court of the King of the Underworld (Yanluo Wang).
Checking his Book of Life and Death (Shengsi bu), the king discovers the true identities of
Liang and Zhu and sends them to the Jade Emperor, as they have now completed their
three incarnations on earth. Ma Wencai is sent back to earth, where he happily marries
his predestined bride. Liuyin ji [1930s?]; and Liang Shanbo baojuan 1924. Also see Ding Yi
1992b. 
66. Ding Yi 1992b. 
67 .Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi 1983. 
68. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 2. 
69. Quoted in Zhou Huiling 1996. 
70. For a discussion of Shanghai’s entertainment market in the late nineteenth cen-
tury, see Luo Suwen 1993. 
71. For a discussion of cross-gender performance and performers in ancient China,
see Zeng Yongyi 1976. 
72. For a discussion of gender and performance in early Republican China, see Zhou
Huiling 1996. 
73. Zhang Faying 2002, 206–10. 
74. For details on all-girls opera in the Jiangnan region, see Luo Suwen 2005. 
75. In 1916, Zhang Zaiyang, a Shengxian native who became governor of Zhejiang
in 1922, organized an all-girls Beijing opera troupe in Hangzhou, the provincial capital.
When he brought the troupe back to his hometown, Chongren, to celebrate his father-
Notes to Pages 49–54    283

=== PDF PAGE 305 ===

in-law’s birthday, the rural town was astir with excitement. The governor’s patronage of
all-girls opera may have encouraged other Shengxian natives to organize their own all-
girls troupes. Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi 1983. 
76. This account of the ﬁrst girls’ training school in Shi’s Village is based largely on
Jin Xiangyin 1992; Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi1983; and research at the Yue Opera Museum in
Shengxian in 1995. 
77 . Wang was not a native of Shi’s Village but came to live with his wife’s family. His
status might have given him less credibility than a native villager would have enjoyed in
the same circumstances. It is not clear whether or not his sojourn in Shanghai added to
or reduced his credibility in the eyes of the villagers. See Jin Xiangyin 1992. 
78. Ibid. 
79. Ibid.
80. Ibid.
81. Ibid.
82. Ibid.
83. The decline of all-girls Beijing opera and the rise of girls’ Shengxian opera were
captured in a book published in 1928, titled Hangsu yifeng buji (Supplement to Old Folk
Customs in Hangzhou). Quoted in Jin Xiangyin 1992, 62. 
84. Shaoxing wanbao July 1, 1935. Quoted in Jin Xiangyin 1992, 62. 
85. Jin Xiangyin 1992. 
86. See Zhejiang sheng nongcun diaocha 1934; and Shaoxing shangbao niankan 1935. 
87 . An article in a local newspaper reads: “Why is didu opera developing so well at a
time of rural bankruptcy?...  P e a s a n t  w o m e n  i n  g e n e r a l  h a v e  n o  work to do because of
the decline of sericulture in the countryside ,...  and this is why there are so many didu
opera troupes nowadays.” Quoted in Gao Yilong 1991, 57 . 
88. See Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi 1983. 
89. Xinwen bao, entertainment advertisement pages, 1930s. Also, interview with Zhang
Rongbiao and Zhang Yanqiu, 1995. 
2. The Rise of Feminine Opera
1. This was a way of saying that she did not have a sexual relationship with her direc-
tor, thus of defending herself against Zhang Chunfan’s accusation. Xinwen bao, Decem-
ber 21, 1947 .
2. He 1935, 34.
3. Ko 1994, 119–23. See chapter 1, note 3.
4. A speciﬁc example is that of Li Xiangjun, the courtesan heroine in Kong Shangren’s
renowned seventeenth-century drama Peach Blossom Fan(Taohua shan). Other courtesans
in traditional literature who kept their bodily purity for their loved ones include Li Wa
and Du Shiniang, among many others.
5. Cheng 1996.
6. Even getting married could hurt an actress’s popularity. Several retired Yue opera
284 Notes to Pages 54–63

=== PDF PAGE 306 ===

actresses I interviewed in Shanghai in 1995 and 1996 told me that fans did not like their
favorite actresses to be married or have affairs with men, and the careers of many well-
known actresses went downhill after they married. There are also many whispers about
homosexual relationships among Yue opera practitioners and audience members, and those
affairs also hurt the actresses involved. In these cases, it seems that what mattered was
the fact that an actress was taken away from the public by an individual.
7 . For a discussion of this reformist discourse on theatrical reform, see Hsiao-T’i Li
1996. For studies of Shanghai prostitutes and the discursive formations of the concept
of “prostitutes” ( jinü) in the Republican period, see Hershatter 1997, part 2.
8. The conception of victimized Chinese women advocated by May Fourth New Cul-
ture intellectuals continues to dominate various understandings of Chinese women up
to the present time. Dorothy Ko was among the ﬁrst to challenge this May Fourth dis-
course. Ko 1994, “Introduction.” More recently, Wendy Larson offered in-depth analy-
ses of how the female body was made to carry various meanings for male elite discourse
in the early Republican period. See Larson 1998.
9. Hsiao-T’i Li discusses the intellectuals’ use of Beijing opera as a means of impart-
ing reform ideas to the masses. See Hsiao-T’i Li 1996.
10. For detailed examination of the reformist construction of the idea of the prosti-
tute, see Hershatter 1997, part 2.
11. A popular Chinese folk tale about Lady Meng Jiang is representative of a large
repertoire of folk stories with similar plots and images. Lady Meng Jiang’s husband was
drafted by the First Emperor to build the Great Wall and never returned. He was believed
to have been buried underneath the Wall. Lady Meng Jiang was so sad that she wept day
and night beside the Great Wall for forty-nine days. Her endless tears ﬂowed like a river
and eventually brought down the Wall.
12. He 1935.
13. Ibid.
14. See Cai’s scrolls for Ruan Lingyu’s funeral in He et al. 1986, 46; and Lu Xun 1935.
15. For a representative publication about the making of Beijing opera into a “national
opera,” see Yu Shangyuan 1927; and Qi Rushan 1964, vol. 3: “Guoju gailun.” 
16. The following brief account of life in an all-girls training school and a school that
became a company is based on a variety of sources, including Xuesheng jinian kan 1946;
Fanghua jukan 1947; Yueju suyuan 1992; and Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi1983. I also relied on my
1995 and 1996 interviews with many retired actresses, including Zhang Rongbiao, Zhang
Yanqiu, Xiao-Bai Yumei, Yuan Xuefen, Fu Quanxiang, and Xu Yulan.
17 .Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 1.
18. In her heyday, Yao Shuijuan, a Yue opera star, bought a lease of the Queen’s Great
Theater with the help of her wealthy patron Wei Jinshan, manager of the Zhonghui bank
owned by Du Yuesheng, and operated it for a short period of time.
19. Yuan Xuefen attended the village primary school for one or two years and achieved
basic literacy, while Zhu Shuizhao had a primary-school education, but they were unusual
among Yue opera actresses. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946; and Fanghua jukan 1947 .
Notes to Pages 64–70    285

=== PDF PAGE 307 ===

20. This account of the professional and personal lives of Yue opera actresses in Shang-
hai is based largely on a variety of sources, including Xuesheng jinian kan 1946 and Fanghua
jukan 1947, as well as interviews in 1995 and 1996 with many retired actresses, includ-
ing Zhang Rongbiao, Zhang Yanqiu, Xiao-Bai Yumei, Yuan Xuefen, Fu Quanxiang, and
Xu Yulan. 
21. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995, 1996, and with Wei Shaochang, 1996.
22. Lu Xun 1935.
23. Interviews with the witness Yuan Xuefen and Fu Quanxiang. Partly for his involve-
ment with Ma’s death, Lu was executed for being “counter revolutionary” by the PRC
government in 1951. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 362. 
24. Zhang and Gao 1984.
25. Yuan 1994, 63. 
26. Yuan 2002, 6.
27 . Ibid., 7; and Yuan 1983, 59–61.
28. Danghu chuan [1920s?].
29. See He Wenxiuand A Pair of Phoenix Jade Clasp(Yu lianhuan), in Suqu. In The Butterﬂy
Lovers, I found, for example, several obscene jokes in a piece sung by the ﬁrst generation
of women actors of Shengxian opera in the early 1930s. Shengxianxi jijing 1996.
30. Sanxiao yinyuan 1930s, 18.
31. Another example is in Xiang Hudie mid-1940s, 28–36. 
32. Both Shengxian and Yuyao were part of Shaoxing Prefecture.
33. Shaoxingxi bao, March 13, 1941.
34. Two aspects contributed to the historical transition of Yue opera from all-male to
all-female. First, the institution of the all-girls opera schools blossomed in Shengxian and
adjacent counties in the early 1930s, as discussed in chapter 1. And the second was the
artistic aspect of this transition, discussed here.
35. Xiao Wo, “Shaoxing diduban de jiantao” (A critique of Shaoxing didu opera). In
Shaoxing shangbao liangzhounian jinian tekan, October 1935.
36. As discussed in “Introduction: Opera, Gender, and the City,” in this volume, Hol-
lywood’s love melodramas were popular in Shanghai in the 1920s and 1930s, before the
rise of women’s Yue opera. Most Yue opera actresses active in the 1930s and 1940s, includ-
ing Yuan Xuefen, Fu Quanxiang, and Xiao Dangui, were known to be admirers and eager
students of Hollywood movies, and many Yue opera audience members were also movie-
goers. Moreover, Hollywood style had a signiﬁcant impact on Chinese ﬁlm and theatrical
arts. Paul Pickowicz has pointed out the relationship between Hollywood ﬁlms and Chi-
nese left-wing ﬁlms; see Pickowicz 1993. 
37 . Xiao Wo, “Shaoxing diduban de jiantao” (A critique of Shaoxing didu opera). In
Shaoxing shangbao liangzhounian jinian tekan, October 1935.
38. Zhang Linghui 1977 . 
39. Shaoxingxi bao, March 14, 1941. 
40. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, Fu Quanxiang, and Xu Yulan, 1995, 1996.
286 Notes to Pages 70–83

=== PDF PAGE 308 ===

41. Fan Li and Wen Zhong are both pseudonyms, pronounced the same as the names
of the two ministers of the ancient Yue state [present-day Zhejiang ] who helped the
king of Yue rebound from a total defeat at the hands of the king of Wu and regain glory
and power. The adoption of these names by the two modern Zhejiang natives was clearly
a gesture of resistance against Japan and showed their intention to help establish their
native opera in Shanghai. Fan Li’s ﬁrst script is indeed the patriotic Hua Mulan, which is
discussed later in this chapter.
42. Yuan Xuefen 1983, 60.
43. Ibid.
44. Interview with Yuan Xuefen, 1995. Also see Yuan Xuefen 1983, 60–61. Zhang
and Gao 1984.
45. Shanghai chunqiu 1948. Also see Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian 1981, 64–65.
46. Interview with Han Yi, 2002.
47 . Yuan Xuefen 1983, 60–61.
48. Fan Ruijuan 1994, 357 .
49. For an extensive description of the spoken-drama movement and resistance to the
Japanese invasion, see Hung 1994.
50. For a description of the spoken-drama movement in “island” Shanghai during the
Japanese occupation, see Ke 1994, vol. 2.
51. Han Yi’s story is based on interviews conducted in Shanghai in summer 2002.
52. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 20.
53. Ibid.; interviews with Cheng Rong, 1995; also see Cheng Rong’s essay in Gao and
Lu 1994, 385–92.
54. Note that the Soviet Union and Japan were not at war until August 1945, when
the Red Army entered Japanese-occupied Manchuria after the United States dropped
an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. Soviet Union Radio did not cease operating in Shang-
hai till sometime during the postwar period.
55. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946; interview with Chen Shulian, 1995.
56. Gao and Lu 1994, 176–205.
57 . Fan Ruijuan 1994, 361.
58. Zhang Guifeng 1982. In Chinese operas, the clown is an important supporting
role that can be used to portray many different characters and make them somewhat
comic.
59. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946; Fan Ruijuan 1994; and other articles in Gao and Lu 1994.
60. Zheng Chuanjian, a veteran Kun opera performer who became the choreogra-
pher for a number of Yue opera companies in the 1940s, taught Yue opera actresses Kun
opera dance and helped design many famous Yue opera dance pieces.
61. See Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 76–80; also see Fanghua jukan 1947 .
62. The emphasis on Mulan being a ﬁlial daughter and a loyal general at the same
time probably began as early as the Tang dynasty, as seen in Wei Yuanfu’s poem about
Mulan, quoted in Liu Wanzhang 1940.
Notes to Pages 83–93    287

=== PDF PAGE 309 ===

63.The China Press, September 11, 1938. Reproduced in a photograph in Wei Shaochang
1995.
64. The top CCP leader, Zhou Enlai, attended Yuan’s performance, while inﬂuential
intellectuals such as Tian Han and Hong Shen attended Xu Yulan’s performance. See
Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 2: 17 . 
65. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 48, 171–72.
66. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 163–64.
67 . Bai Yushuang was famous for her bold erotic performances, and her performances
in Shanghai in the mid-1930s, including the original Widow Ma’s Inn, caused a sensation
and established her superstar status in pingopera. The Yue opera Widow Ma’s Innwas adapted
from ping opera. 
68. Yueju huabao, January 12, 1941. 
69. Interview with Wu Ping, 1996.
70. Di Renjie (630–700) was a high ofﬁcial in the Tang dynasty who served during
the reigns of Emperor Gao Zong and Empress Wu Zetian. Cihai 1989, 923.
71.Widow Ma’s Inn is much more than an erotic play. In fact, the seduction scene is
the only erotic scene in the entire play. The play and Xiao’s performance are discussed
in chapter 6. 
72. Record of Retributions is sometimes also titled Mrs. Diao (Diao Liu shi). Shengxianxi
jijing 1996, 154–56.
73. Although the Nationalist Shanghai municipal government did take action against
more modern entertainment places such as dance halls toward the end of its rule, it did
not have the will or the resources to check on the numerous local operas that were put
on every day in large and small theaters across Shanghai. 
74. Wendy Larson makes a similar argument that the traditional framework of gender
relations continued to dominate the discourse of women’s liberation in the early Repub-
lican period. See Larson 1998.
75. Xu Jin 1947 .
76. Xinmin wanbao, August 22, 1947 . 
77 .Fanghua jukan 1947 .
78. Yue Jia 1992.
79. In its details, this act seems not very different from the 1930s audio recording.
While the singing by two male actors in the recording sounds a bit faster and coarse, the
lyrics, dramatic turns, and scenes are rather similar. Another recording made in the late
1930s by two actresses shows a similar situation. Shengxianxi jijing 1996, 58–59, 99–100.
80. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 53, 172–73.
81. Ibid., 173.
82. Ibid., 53, 172–73.
83. Fan Ruijuan 1989.
84. Ibid.
85. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 1: 59, 62.
86. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997 .
288 Notes to Pages 93–105

=== PDF PAGE 310 ===

3. Patrons and Patronage
1. My take on the Shanghai middle class is in agreement with that of such scholars
as Wen-hsin Yeh and Hanchao Lu. Yeh discussed the “petty urbanites” as the middle and
lower-middle class in Republican Shanghai, while Lu regarded as middle class all the res-
idents of shikumen, the three-story townhouses built on narrow lanes that led off the main
roads. Indeed, the majority of Yue opera audience members were “petty urbanites” liv-
ing mostly in such houses regardless of their occupation and gender. See Wen-hsin Yeh
1992; and Hanchao Lu 1999.
2. Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian 1981, 65.
3. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
4. Quoted in Luo Suwen 1993.
5. Chen Fengyuan 1939, 39.
6. Shanghai chunqiu 1948, vol. 2: 58.
7 . See Shanghai Yueju zhi1995, vol. 4: 6–19.
8. Ibid.
9. Interviews with Zhang Rongbiao and Zhang Yanqiu, November 1995.
10. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995–96.
11.Shaoxingxi bao, March 14, 1941.
12. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 2002.
13. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
14. The stratiﬁcation of audiences for various local operas was embedded in native-
place sociology, which is discussed in the next section.
15. Interview with Dai Xinghuang, 2001.
16. Chen Zhengxiang 1970.
17 . For extensive studies on native bonds and organizations in large cities, see Good-
man 1995; and Rowe 1989.
18. For a discussion of native-place politics and discrimination against Subei natives
in Shanghai, see Honig 1993, 1986.
19. Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939, 166.
20. See Honig 1986.
21. See Honig 1986, 1993.
22. Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939.
23. Shanghai Tebieshi Gongyongju 1943, 14.
24. For detailed discussions of Ningbo-Shaoxing immigrants and their economic
power in Shanghai, see Susan Mann Jones 1974; Mann 1984; Goodman 1995; and Cole
1986.
25. See Sekko zaibatsu,October 15, 1929; and Yamagami 1937 . Also see Goodman 1995;
and Susan Mann Jones 1974.
26. “Shanhai ni okeru sens¯ogyo no j¯oky¯o” 1941.
27 . See Cihai1989; and Shengxian zhi 1989, 584.
28. See Tang 1989, 800; and Shen, Jiang, Zheng 1996, vol. 2: 130. 
Notes to Pages 106–113    289

=== PDF PAGE 311 ===

29. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 2: 104–5. Shaoxingxi bao, February 2, 1941.
30. Quoted in Wei 1989, 5. 
31. Chen Xi 1941.
32. Republican Shanghai’s factory workers represented a new industrial class that
enjoyed relatively stable wages and generally earned more than junior white-collar work-
ers and clerks as well as lower-class laborers and domestic servants. Many of them, as
Haochao Lu argued, earned wages that easily placed them in the ranks of the lower to
middle class. See Hanchao Lu 1999. 
33. Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939. According to Zhang Qi, a respected authority on the
communist labor movement, the Chinese Communist Party sponsored the book project.
Party and labor movement leaders in Shanghai, including Liu Changsheng, Liu Ningyi,
Ma Chungu, and Zhang Qi, organized the investigations and the writing of the book;
the communist historian Gu Zhun conducted the ﬁnal editing. Zhu Bangxing, Hu Lin’ge,
and Xu Sheng were ﬁctitious names, and the Yuandong Publishing House in Hong Kong
was simply a fabrication. The book was actually printed in Shanghai. Chapters were writ-
ten by communist labor movement cadres who penetrated various industries as ordinary
workers and gained ﬁrsthand knowledge of the conditions. The project’s purpose was to
provide the CCP with data on which it would develop its labor movement guidelines.
See Zhang Qi 1984.
34. Ibid., 31, 125, 179.
35. For a detailed study of female cotton-mill workers in Shanghai, see Honig 1986.
36. In comparison, in 1939, the retail price for rice was ¥0.12 per jin (1 jin = 0.5 kilo-
gram or 1.1023 pound); ¥0.92 for each cake of soap; ¥0.426 for each jin of cooking oil;
and ¥0.131 for each chi (1 chi = 1.0936 feet) of cloth. Shanghai jiefang qianhou wujia ziliao
huibian 1958, 89. These statistics and those that follow cannot be taken as absolutely accu-
rate, given the severe inﬂation of the late 1930s and possible errors in the sources, which
are almost impossible to verify. The numbers, however, do provide a general sense of
the economics of viewing opera.
37 . Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939, 95–96.
38. Ibid., 7 .
39. Ibid., 180.
40. Ibid., 125.
41. Ibid., 123, 130–33, 186–87 .
42.Yue ou1939, vol. 4 (December). Also, according to Xiao-Bai Yumei, who performed
at the New World during the late 1930s, Yue opera was one of the most popular local
operas performed there. Within the small theater where Yue opera was staged, several
rows of benches were placed in front of the stage with a rope closing off the area. Spec-
tators paid an entrance fee of twenty-ﬁve cents at the door. Those who paid another
forty cents to the Yue opera company were seated on the benches and served tea and a
hot-pressed towel, while those who chose to stand and view the performance from behind
the closed area did not have to pay the extra fee. Yue opera usually had afternoon shows
290 Notes to Pages 114–117

=== PDF PAGE 312 ===

and evening shows. During the interim, the stage was taken over by comic shows in local
Shanghai dialect. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995–96.
43. Chen Fengyuan 1939, 39.
44. Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939, 95–96.
45. Interviews with Wei Shaochang, 1996.
46. Wei Shaochang edited Shaoxing Opera Daily, The Song of Yue(Yue ou), and Yue Opera
Pictorial (Yueju huabao) in the late 1930s and early 1940s. 
47 . Interview with Wu Ping, 1996.
48. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 1995.
49. For a discussion on Ningbo women’s domesticity, see Mann 1994.
50. Interview with Zhang Xingzhou, 1996.
51. Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939, 699–719.
52. The highest and lowest ﬁgures in the statistics have been discounted. Shanghai
Tebieshi Gongyongju 1941, 29–30. 
53. Zhu, Hu, and Xu 1939, 700.
54. Interview with Wu Ping, 1996. Wen-hsin Yeh also describes the everyday lives
of white-collar employees and their sense of modernity in her essay on Shanghai’s China
Bank. See Wen-hsin Yeh 1995.
55. Round-table discussion by women writers in Zazhi, vol. 13, no. 3 (April 1944): 55.
Here and there in her writings, Su Qing also mentioned her mother, relatives, and her-
self attending Yue opera.
56. Interviews with Teng Jiazhen and Song Zhiyou, 1996.
57 . Interview with Chen Shulian, 1995.
58. Yueju bao, December 5, 1948.
59. Ibid., July 24, 1949.
60. See Zhang Ailing’s work of the 1940s. Zhang Zijing, Zhang Ailing’s younger
brother, also described his father’s and stepmother’s decadent lifestyle in his memoir.
See Zhang Zijing 1996.
61. For an extensive description of courtesans’ involvement with actors in early
 twentieth-century Shanghai, see Hershatter 1997 . 
62. Other actresses I interviewed did not dispute Xiao-Bai’s account of her father’s
morality.
63. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995–96.
64. Hershatter describes liaisons between courtesans and actors as a widespread prac-
tice in the early twentieth century. Yet, courtesans often married their rich customers,
with many carrying their old habit of ﬂirting with actors into their married lives, as in
the case of Lin Daiyu, the famous courtesan who adopted the name of the heroine of
Dream of the Red Chamber. Hershatter 1997, 116–17, 149–50.
65. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995–96.
66. Actresses certainly did engage in sexual relations, with theater bosses or audience
members, and some got married. The operagoing public and potential patrons usually
Notes to Pages 117–125    291

=== PDF PAGE 313 ===

lost interest in married actresses, as if they were then no longer available. For reasons
discussed in this chapter and in greater detail in chapter 2, married actresses inevitably
lost their popularity. Many popular actresses thus chose to remain single until their early
thirties, very late given the marriage conventions of the time.
67 . Wei Shaochang, whose parents were patrons of Yao Shuijuan, attributed Yao’s rise
in part to this circumstance: “The fact that there were only actresses backstage facili-
tated the development of adoptive mother and sworn sister relationships between
actresses and rich patrons.” Wei 1982, 95.
68. Adoptive family relations—such as adoptive mother, father, brother, and sister—
were commonly known in traditional Chinese society. In northern China, an adoptive
mother was dubbed gan ma and an adoptive father was called gan die; in the Yangzi River
delta, the terms were guofang xiang for an adoptive mother and guofang ye for an adoptive
father. This practice was especially popular among gangsters and underworld organiza-
tions in modern periods. The women’s Yue opera practice may be seen as an indication
of the circle’s involvement with gangsters, an inevitable and frequent phenomenon for
lowbrow entertainment genres of the time. But just as adoptive relationships were not
unknown among the general population, adoptive relationships in women’s Yue opera
did not necessarily have gangster connections. 
69. Interviews with actresses and fans of Yue opera, 1995–96.
70. Usually, one performance for one charity project, although on rare occasions, the
actress would perform twice.
71. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995–96. Mmameans “mother” in Shanghai dialect.
72. Shaoxingxi bao, February 3, 1941. 
73. Yue ou 1939, vol. 1 (July).
74. Xiao Dangui was the only other actress who nominally had her own theater in
the mid-1940s, although it was controlled by Zhang Chunfan.
75. Yao Shuijuan zhuanji 1939.
76. Interview with Wei Shaochang, 1996.
77 .Banyue xiju, vol. 3, issue 2 (December 5, 1940). Cited in Wei 1989, 4.
78. Wei 1989, 4.
79. Interview with Gao Jin, 1996. Interview with Dai Xinghuang, 2001. Dai was at
that time the head of the company for which Gao Jin was the top actress. 
80. Yueju bao, August 4, 1946.
81. Interviews with Xiao-Bai Yumei, 1995–96.
82. Zhao Xiaosi 1994, 155, 161–64, 198–99.
83. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 153–54.
84. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 2002.
85. Ibid.
86. Interview with Zhou Baokui, 1996. While leading actresses were equipped with
gorgeous paraphernalia and costumes and performed earnestly, the rest of the team was
not as well equipped and often less enthusiastic in their performance. This began to change
292 Notes to Pages 125–132

=== PDF PAGE 314 ===

only after 1949, when the state took control of performing arts and demanded that every
actor take his or her role seriously in order to raise production values overall.
87 . The same can also be said of other popular-entertainment forms, including Suzhou
story-singing, Shanghai opera, Beijing opera, and, later, comic shows in Shanghai dia -
lect. For a discussion of Suzhou story-singing on the radio, see Bensen 1995.
88. Ibid. For a history of radio in Shanghai, see Shanghai yanjiu ziliao xuji 1937, 563–
67 .
89. For a discussion of life in Republican Shanghai, see Hanchao Lu 1995.
90. The huqin is a two-string instrument played with a bow. Interview with Wu Ping,
1996.
91. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 5: 44.
92. Yueju zhuankan 1940.
93. Suzhou story-singing, Shanghai opera, Beijing opera, and comic shows also con-
tracted with radio stations for live broadcast programs. Hours and deals varied with indi-
vidual cases.
94. Shi 1939. 
95. Qiu Wenguang 1985.
96. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 5: 104.
97 . These recordings are hard to ﬁnd today but, fortunately, are available in the Audio
and Video Division of the Shanghai Municipal Library. The recordings did what radio
could not do—provided faithful historical records of the development of Yue opera dur-
ing that period. Shengxianxi jijing 1996.
98. The Shanghai Yiming Publishing House (Shanghai Yimin Shuju) printed and dis-
tributed many Yue opera lyric handbooks in the 1930s and 1940s from several locations
in residential lanes. Fragrant Butterﬂies (Xiang hudie), for example, was distributed from
K22 Chengxing Lane, Paike Road, while Marriage as a Result of Three Smileswas printed on
East Xihua Road across Zhaofeng Road in Hongkou. See Xiang hudie mid-1940s; and San -
xiao yinyuan 1930s. 
99. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 1995.
100. Unfortunately, her son set all of her collections, several suitcases of playbills and
lyric books, on ﬁre during the Cultural Revolution, in response to the campaign of clean-
ing the “four old traditions”—old thinking, old habits, old customs, and old traditions.
Interview with Wu Ping, 1996.
101.Shanghai yanjiu ziliao xuji 1937, 533.
102. Wang Changnian 1947, 203–7; Shanghai zhi 1946, 131–37 .
103.Shanghai geming wenhua dashi ji 1991, 249–50; and Zhang and Gao 1984, 173.
104. Xiao Yueying 1983, 258.
105.Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 4: 100.
106. Today’s digital technology seems to be coming to Yue opera’s aid. CDs, video
compact discs (VCDs), and DVDs help maintain a sizable basic audience at a time when
live performances have been cut to the minimum. 
Notes to Pages 132–138    293

=== PDF PAGE 315 ===

4. Staging in the Public Arena
1.Shijie chenbao, May 7, 1946; and Xinmin bao, May 7, 1946. Quoted in Xuesheng jinian kan
1946, 186.
2. Xinmin bao, May 7, 1946. Quoted in Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 186. 
3. Shanghai geming wenhua dashi ji 1991, 167, 169.
4. Ibid., 187 .
5. Ibid., 218, 281.
6. Ibid., 169.
7 . Ibid., 10, 169, 187–88.
8. The owner of Wenhui Daily invited Chu Yukun, a CCP member, to be editor in
chief, and the paper resumed publication on August 18, 1945. The Shanghai Dagong Daily’s
editor in chief was Xu Zhucheng, a CCP member and former editor in chief of Wenhui
Daily. Dagong Daily resumed operations on November 11, 1945. See Shanghai geming wen-
hua dashi ji 1991, 166. 
9. Zhang and Gao 1984, 110.
10. Yue opera researcher Gao Yilong provided me with an introduction to Ding, whom
I interviewed in February 1996. For Ding’s book, see Ding Ying 1946.
11. Ding Jingtang 1995.
12. In fact, there was very little organized resistance in occupied Shanghai, except
for some Nationalist intelligence forces carrying out special tasks, such as assassinating
important collaborators. 
13. The journal was published by the son and daughter-in-law of Liu Chenggan, a
famous book collector from Wuxing, Jiangsu. See Ding Jingtang 1982.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.
16. Ding Jingtang 1995.
17 . Ibid.
18. Zhang and Gao 1984.
19. Shishi xinbao, April 28, 1946.
20. Shishi xinbao, May 10, 1946. Quoted in Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 186.
21.Shishi xinbao, May 17, 1946. 
22. Wenhui bao, May 9, 1946. 
23. Shijie chenbao, May 8, 1946. The 1946 production of the Yue opera Sister Xianglin
adds the thread of a love story between Sister Xianglin and the son of the Lu family, Ah
Niu. The two are childhood sweethearts, but class difference and the arranged marriage
system make it impossible for them to be married. As discussed in chapter 2, it was a
common practice of the New Yue Opera reforms to add a love story to patriotic or socially
meaningful plays so as to cater to the tastes of the Yue opera audience. Yuan Xuefen and
Nan Wei consulted with Xu Guangping, and a supportive Xu gave her consent to this
addition. Left-wing intellectuals such as Tian Han also expressed understanding of the
necessity of this addition. All agreed, however, that the addition was trivial at best and
294 Notes to Pages 139–148

=== PDF PAGE 316 ===

distorted the spirit of Lu Xun’s original story at worst. In subsequent revisions and restag-
ings of the play during the PRC period, the love story was taken out completely. See
Xianglin sao 1949; Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 137; and Xianglin sao 1978. 
24. Xinwen bao, October 28, 1946.
25. Tian Han, “Juyi dazhonghua zhi lu,” Zhou bao 1946, vol. 38 (May 25).
26. Shanghai geming wenhua dashi ji 1991, 206–7 . Also quoted in Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997,
313; and Zhang and Gao 1984, 135.
27 .Shanghai geming wenhua dashi ji 1991, 180–81. Also quoted in Shanghai Yueju zhi1997,
313; and Zhang and Gao 1984, 135.
28. Interview with Xu Yulan, 1995. Also see Zhang and Gao 1984.
29. Interview with Fu Quanxiang, 1995.
30. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1995, vol. 2: 41–42; Yin 1982, 16; and Zhang and Gao 1984,  
126–27 .
31. Interviews with Fu Quanxiang, Xiao-Bai Yumei, and Xu Yulan, 1995–96. A con-
temporaneous joke in Shanghai teased Shengxian natives for having two distinctive local
products: Shengxian opera and Shengxian hooligans. The Shengxian hooligans, accord-
ing to the actress Zhou Baokui, were really just country folks with loud voices, a coarse
manner, and an eagerness to resort to physical ﬁghts. Interview with Zhou Baokui, 1996.
For a brief discussion of Shengxian hooligans in Shanghai and their relationship with
Shengxian opera, see Cole 1986.
32. Dagong bao, August 29, 1946. 
33. Shijie chenbao, September 11, 1946; Xinmin wanbao, September 18, 1946. 
34. Shen bao, September 11, 1946.
35. Shijie chenbao, September 11, 1946.
36. Zhang and Gao 1984, 129–30.
37 . Ibid., 128.
38. Zhongyang ribao: Shanghai ban, September 15, 1946.
39. See advertisement in Xinwen bao, October 10, 1946. 
40. See Zhang and Gao 1984, 131.
41. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 2002.
42. On January 5, 1947, Yuan Xuefen published “Words Before My Retirement” in The
New Citizen Evening News. Quoted in Zhang and Gao 1984, 137–38.
43. Yuan Xuefen complained that she was the only one who conscientiously pursued
Yue opera reform and that other actresses simply followed suit without understanding
the true meaning of reform. Interview with Yuan Xuefen, 1995.
44. Ibid.
45. Xinwen bao, January 6, 1947 .
46. Quoted in Zhang and Gao 1984, 145–46.
47 . The theater employees revolted against the management, but their request for a
raise was ﬁrmly rejected. It is, however, not clear how the labor dispute within the the-
ater affected the Yue opera fund-raising performances.Luobinhan, August 13 and 16, 1947 .
48. In one account, Wang Xiaolai, head of the Shengxian native-place organization
Notes to Pages 148–159    295

=== PDF PAGE 317 ===

in Shanghai, said to Fu Quanxiang and Zhu Shuizhao, the two “diplomats” for the ten
sisters: “You young girls are really bold. You plan for such a grand performance but haven’t
even sent a thank-you gift to our little brothers. All right, I will help you out myself.
Give me a hundred million yuan and I will quiet them down.” Fu and Zhu agreed to pay
half the amount and wrote a check to Wang. When they asked for a receipt, Wang with-
drew his demand. The story, although unveriﬁed, is consistent with known practices of
the time. Quoted in Zhang and Gao 1984. 
49. Luobinhan, August 28, 1947 .
50. See Zhang and Gao 1984, 158–59.
51. Luobinhan, August 5, 1947 .
52. Ibid., August 16, 1947 .
53. Ibid., August 28, 1947 .
54. Xinmin wanbao, August 28, 1947 . 
55. Ibid., August 22, 1947 . 
56. Xinwen bao, August 28, 1947 .
57 . Xiang Zhen 1992; and Zhou Baokui 1990.
58. This account is based on miscellaneous sources, including Zhang Chunfan’s state-
ment to the police, witness accounts, my interviews with witnesses, and the written rec-
ollections of witnesses.
59. Interviews with various Yue opera personalities, including Han Yi, 2002; Yuan Xue-
fen, 1995; Fu Quanxiang, 1995; Xu Yulan, 1995; and Zhou Baokui, 1996. 
60. Dagong bao, October 15, 1947 .
61. Ibid., October 17, 1947 .
62. Ibid.
63. Shen bao, October 18, 1947 .
64. Ibid.
65. Ibid.
66. Dagong bao, October 20, 1947 .
67 . Ibid., October 27, 1947 .
68. Ibid., October 31, 1947 .
69. Shen bao, November 12, 1947 .
70. Xinwen bao, December 28, 1947 .
71. Zhang Chunfan, as the main suspect in Xiao’s case, was deprived of any right to
Xiao’s legacy. Xinwen bao, December 15, 1947 . A few years later, in 1951, Zhang was
arrested and executed by the newly established Shanghai People’s Government. Xiao Dan-
gui’s suicide was cited as one of his main crimes. 
72. Interview with Fu Quanxiang, 1995.
73. Interviews with Yuan Xuefen and Xu Yulan, 1995.
74. Descriptions of Xiao as an unhappy woman are given in various sources, includ-
ing a story in the tabloid Robin Hood (Luobinhan, August 25, 1947); Xu Yulan’s biography
(Zhao Xiaosi 1994); Yuan Xuefen’s biography (Zhang and Gao 1984); and my interviews
with Fu Quanxiang, Xu Yulan, and Yuan Xuefen, 1995.
296 Notes to Pages 159–169

=== PDF PAGE 318 ===

75. Dagong bao, October 27, 1947 .
76. See Shen bao, November, 12, 1947 .
77 . Lu Xun 1935.
78. Ibid.
5. The Opera as History
1. Interview with Yuan Xuefen, 2003. Also see Yuan Xuefen 2002, 121.
2. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 379–80.
3. The suggestion that Xie Jin is a master of melodrama follows Pickowicz, who con-
tested claims made by PRC ﬁlm historians that Xie and other left-wing ﬁlmmakers prac-
ticed social realism. See Pickowicz 1993.
4. “Wutai jiemei” 1982, 305–6.
5. Xie Jin, “Director’s elaboration,” in “Wutai jiemei”1982, 274–76.
6. “Wutai jiemei” 1982, 153.
7 . In the original script, Chunhua contemplates the question of what kind of play she
should perform for the rest of her life, and the ﬁnal version changes the uncertainty into
a clear-cut answer. See ibid., 148.
8. Xie Jin, “Director’s elaboration,” in “Wutai jiemei”1982, 274.
9. Interview with Fu Quanxiang, 1995.
10. See Yueju shijie1941, January–June.
11.Yueju bao, September 22, 1946.
12. Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 332.
13. Ibid., 23. 
14. Shanghai Shi Shehui Ju dang’an 1946–49.
15. Interview with Qiu Yawei and Qiu Wenguang, 1996.
16. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 313.
17 . Interview with Li Taicheng, 1996.
18. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 4.
19. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
20. Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 4.
21. The Shanghai Yue Opera House and the Shanghai Beijing Opera House were
ﬁrst established in 1950 as the East China Yue Opera Experimental Company and the
East China Beijing Opera Experimental Company; they took on their current names in
1955, when the East China administrative district was abolished. The Shanghai Yue Opera
House was at ﬁrst designated the only state theater in Shanghai directly under the Cul-
tural Affairs Bureau of the central government but was later given back to Shanghai for
logistic reasons. See Shanghai Shi Wenhua Ju dang’an 1949–66, B9–2–28. The Shanghai
Shanghai Opera Company and the Shanghai Huai Opera Company were established
in February and May 1953, respectively. See Shanghai Huju zhi 1999, 25; and Shanghai
Huaiju zhi 1998, 22.
22. According to statistics in Shanghai Shi Wenhua Ju dang’an 1949–66.
Notes to Pages 170–184    297

=== PDF PAGE 319 ===

23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Interview with Li Taicheng, 1996.
26. Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian 1981, 559.
27 . Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 120–21.
28. Ibid.
29. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
30. Shengxianxi jijing 1996, 287–90; and interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
31. Fanghua Company also produced Tale of the Western Chamber in 1952, starring the
famous male impersonator Yin Guifang. Not much is known about the play, except that
it was a popular success. See Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 120–21.
32. Yuan Xuefen 2002, 141–45. Also see Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 27 .
33. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 2002.
34. Interview with Wu Xiaolou, 1996.
35. Interview with Zhou Baokui, 1996.
36. “Detailed outline,” in “Wutai jiemei” 1982.
37 . “Epilogue,” in “Wutai jiemei”1982.
38. “Wutai jiemei” 1982, 241–42.
39. Performers as famous as Mei Lanfang and Zhou Xinfang, while no longer subject
to the whim of every patron, still felt obliged to perform at Du Yuesheng’s ostentatious
sixtieth birthday party in 1947 . Most Yue opera stars also performed at the party, but
Yuan Xuefen stuck to her principles and did not go.
40. Lianhe wanbao, June 8, 1946. Quoted in Zhang and Gao 1984, 124.
41. See Zhang and Gao 1984, 123–24.
42. As she claimed some thirty-two years later. Yuan Xuefen 1978.
43. Shanghai geming wenhua dashi ji 1991, 209.
44. Shanghai Shi Wenhua Ju dang’an 1949–66.
45. Interview with Li Taicheng, 1996.
46. Shanghai Shi Wenhua Ju dang’an 1949–66.
47 . “Epilogue,” in “Wutai jiemei”1982.
48. Jin Chunming 2001, 118.
49. Ibid., 117–19, 130–32.
50. See Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 39–42.
51. Yuan Xuefen 1978.
52. Zhang and Gao 1984, 123.
53. Interview with Lu Shijun, 1996; and conversations with Yue opera actresses and
Yue opera scholar Gao Yilong, 1995–96.
54. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
55. Jin Chunming 2001, 215.
56. Ibid., 244–45.
57 . Ibid., 293–96.
298 Notes to Pages 184–199

=== PDF PAGE 320 ===

58. Deng Xiaoping wenxuan, vol. 3: 372. Quoted in Jin Chunming 2001, 294–95.
59. Interview with Li Taicheng, 1996.
60. Interview with Lu Shijun, 2001.
61. Interview with Lu Shijun, 1995.
62. See Gao and Lu 1994.
63. Based on my notes on Wu Boying’s speech at “The Symposium on the Current
Situation and Future Development of Yue Opera,” November 14, 1995, Shanghai. 
64. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 105–53.
65. The following discussion of the play is based on the version performed in Beijing
in 1999, which was made into a video compact disc (VCD) in 1999. I attended a per-
formance of the same version in Shanghai in May 2002.
66. Yin does not specify the reason for this police detainment. They might have been
charged with performing “obscene plays,” one of the most common lodged against
women’s opera performances in the countryside at the time. Yin 1982, 12.
67 . Fanghua jukan1947, 70–71. 
68. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002.
69. Yin’s and Zhu’s breakup in 1948–49 was well known in Yue opera circles. Yin her-
self did not mention this incident in her published recollections.
70. Interview with Su Jinzou, 2002.
71. Interviews with Xue Yunhuang, 2002–3.
72. Interview with Su Jinzou, 2002.
73. Interview with Shan Yangping, 2002. Also see the Shanghai Yue Opera House’s
Web site, http://www.yueju.net. 
74. Interviews with Xue Yunhuang, 2002–3.
75. Wutai jiemei1999.
76. Interview with Qian Huili, 2002.
77 . Interviews with Shan Yangping, 2002–3.
78. Promising actresses Hu Minhua and Fang Xuewen, for example, were in the New
York area, while Wang Zhiping returned from Japan and Xiao Ya from the United States
to resume their acting careers at the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Fang Xuewen later
also returned and rejoined the Fanghua Company in Fuzhou, Fujian.
79. The three-part television drama, Mist and Storm on the Qinhuai River(Qinhuai yanyun),
tells about the romantic encounter between the noted scholar Qian Qianyi and the famous
courtesan Liu Rushi at the end of the Ming dynasty. Interviews with Shan Yangping,
2003. Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 65, 278. 
80. Interview with Su Jinzou, 2002.
6. A Feminine Aesthetics
1. Wen Yi, “Shanghai ‘Lin Meimei’ chang ‘zui’ Rongcheng ren” (Shanghai “Cousin Lin”
charms Chengdu audiences), Xinmin wanbao [Shanghai], April 21, 2004. 
Notes to Pages 199–216    299

=== PDF PAGE 321 ===

2. Luo Suwen also pointed out the differences in taste between Shanghai and Beijing
audiences that affected the development of Shanghai-style Beijing opera. See Luo
Suwen 1993. 
3. This observation is based on random conversations with educated Chinese men
over many years. 
4. Interview with Wu Ping, 1996. 
5. Interview with Cheng Liping, Li Jiang, and Zheng Yinyin, July 2002. 
6. Fanghua jukan 1947 . 
7 . Huang Sha 1983, 363. 
8. For details on how the chai scale system was created, see Yuan Xuefen 2002, 15–
21; and Zhou Baocai 1983, 322–26. 
9. Lian Bo 1983, 347 . 
10. Zhang Lihui 1983. 
11. The following discussion is based on interviews as well as information from con-
temporaneous sources, such as Xuesheng jinian kan 1946. 
12. The dominant color in major operas such as Beijing opera was black, and cotton
was the most common material for costumes. This situation began to change only with
the newfound prominence of female roles in the early twentieth century, and Shanghai
provided material support for this change. Mei Lanfang, for example, had many costumes
made in Shanghai. See Mei Lanfang 1954. 
13. Interviews with Han Yi, 2002. 
14. Interview with Wu Ping, January 1996. 
15. Interview with Cheng Rong, May 2002. 
16. Interview with Wu Ping, January 1996. 
17 . Ibid.
18. Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian 1981, 3. 
19. Interviews with Cheng Rong, 1995. 
20. Gong Hede 1994, 544.
21. Li Huikang 1995, 31. 
22. See Qiu Yawei 1992, 274–75. Lyrics in Shengxianxi jijing 1996, 274–75. 
23. Yueju bao, December 12, 1948. 
24. Ibid.
25. Jiang Zhikang 1995, 85. 
26. Ibid., 84. 
27 . Interview with Xu Yulan, December 1995. 
28. Xu Yulan 1985, 140. 
29. Ibid., 141. 
30. Ibid., 152. 
31. Cao Xueqin, Honglou meng, chapter 26. 
32. Fang and Li 1983, 262–64. 
33. Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 320–24. 
34. Interviews with Cheng Liping, Li Jiang, and Zheng Yinyin, July 2002. 
300 Notes to Pages 216–232

=== PDF PAGE 322 ===

35. Zhang Dai 1597–1679, juan 5. 
36. Larson 1998, 198, 188–97 . 
37 . Ibid., 206. 
38. Ibid., 198–206, 205. 
39. Discussion with Yin Yicui, 2001. 
40. Ma Guafu kaidian 1944. Also see Shengxianxi jijing 1996, 151–52. 
41. Shanghai Yueju zhi1997, 109. 
42. The Yue opera fan Wu Ping, who saw the play in the mid-1940s, remembered
that the play ends with the widow committing suicide when she realizes that the minis-
ter is actually Di Renjie. Interview with Wu Ping, 1996. 
43. Wolf 1975. 
44. Mann 1987 . 
45. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 154. 
46. Yueju shijie 1941, January–June. 
47 . Chen Letian was a qigong master who claimed a great number of followers in the
1980s. 
48. Interview with Fu Quanxiang, 1995. 
49. Shanghai Yueju zhi1997 . 
50. With the success of women’s Yue opera in Shanghai, the daughters of Shanghai
residents also began to join the opera as actresses in the 1940s. 
51. Qi Yaxian 1992, 3–4. 
52. Ibid., 4. 
53. Ibid., 13. 
54. Yang Hansheng 1945. Professor Suetsugu Reiko in Tokyo found this source and
kindly provided a copy of the article for me. 
55. Ibid. 
56. Wang Xiaochuan 1958. 
57 . Yi Bing 1959. 
58. Ibid.
59. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 50. 
60. Shengxianxi jijing 1996, 178–79; Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997, 356. 
61. Xuesheng jinian kan 1946, 50. Shengxianxi jijing 1996, 178–79, 217–18, 305. 
62. Li Jinfeng 1995, 313–14. 
63. Yin Guifang 1951; Fu Jun 1995. 
64. According to the Redologist Xu Gongshi’s calculations. Quoted in Xiang Jing’an,
“Honglou meng zhong jiujing xie le duoshao renwu” (How many characters are there in
Dream of the Red Chamber?), Guangjiao jing (Wide angle), March 2004, Hong Kong. 
65. Xu Jin wrote: “The novel does not contain ‘Baoyu Mourns for Daiyu,’ but many
previous theatrical renditions do. It seems to me that opera especially needs it to meet
the audience’s psychological needs. For even though Daiyu has died, the audience still
wants to see an emotional exchange between the two protagonists. I think that this act
not only reinforces the audience’s sympathy for the two lovers but also helps the image
Notes to Pages 233–249    301

=== PDF PAGE 323 ===

of Baoyu—by showing his determination to break with feudal forces, the play joins Baoyu’s
spirit with that of Daiyu.” Xu Jin 1962, 135. 
66. Shanghai Yueju zhi 1997 . 
67 . Interview with Cheng Liping, 2002. 
7. Conclusion
1. Shanghai’s settlers included people from foreign countries. Although this group was
demographically insigniﬁcant, its social and cultural inﬂuence should not be overlooked. 
2. Chinese women who were educated in the elite rhetoric of women’s liberation and
gender equality tended to have these kinds of views. 
3. See Jin Jiang 2001; and Zheng Wang 2001. 
4. Yang Hua, “Qingbo de Yueju” (Frivolous Yue opera). Available at http://www.xys.org
(posted May 2002). There are many obvious factual errors in this short Internet piece,
indicating that the author is not an opera specialist. 
5. Catherine Yeh’s study on Shanghai courtesans at the turn of the twentieth century
provides another illustration of how public women and their performance of love dra-
mas (both in real life and in role-play games) helped redeﬁne a modern culture of love
while assigning more favorable roles to their profession and to themselves within this
culture. See Catherine Yeh 2006. 
6. Butler 1993, 10. 
7 . Levenson wrote: “Intonation matters, in English as well as in Chinese. We may
describe an item in the historical record as historically (really) signiﬁcant, or as (merely)
historically signiﬁcant. The distinction is between an empirical judgment of fruitfulness
in time and a normative judgment of aridity in the here and now” (Levenson 1958, 85).
8. See Nishimura 2004. 
9. See Bian 2005; and Yixin Chen 2004. 
10. For detailed discussions of the Three Transformations policy of the 1950s, see
Jiang Jin 2005. 
11. See the Shan Yangping Forum, http://sh.netsh.com/bbs/3610/. 
12. See http://www.qianhuili.net/.
302 Notes to Pages 250–264

=== PDF PAGE 324 ===

303
Ai Xia /uni82吳e/uni9吳由e
aimeiju /uni6由由女/uni吳灘8e劇
An E /uni5女89/uni5a25
Anhui /uni5女89/uni5灘女d
Bai Yang /uni吳6吳d/uni694a
Bai Yushuang /uni吳6吳d玉/uni9吳由c
Baimao nü /uni吳6吳d/uni6女d女女
Baishe zhuan /uni吳6吳d/uni86c吳/uni50女3
Baishui tan /uni吳6吳d/uni6c34灘
bangzi 梆/uni5女50
Banyue xiju /uni534a月戲劇
Bao Tianxiao 包天/uni吳女由由
Baoyu yu Daiyu /uni5女灘6玉與/uni9ed女玉
Baqian li lu yun he yue /uni5由6女千/uni9由cc/uni8de灘/uni96灘2 
/uni548c月
beidan /uni60女2/uni65e6
Beiguo Jiangnan 北/uni5吳0女/uni6c5灘南
bentan /uni6吳2c灘
biaozi /uni5a4a/uni5女50
Biyu zan /uni吳8a吳玉/uni吳c2a
bu haokan /uni4e0d/uni59吳d/uni吳吳0女
Bu Wancang /uni535c/uni842c/uni84女c
buwan xiaosheng /uni88dc/uni4e38/uni5c0灘/uni吳5由灘
Cai Chusheng 蔡/uni695a/uni吳5由灘
Cai Lanying 蔡/uni862d/uni82灘由
Cai Yuying 蔡萸/uni82灘由
caicha /uni63a由茶
Can Xue /uni6女98/uni96ea
Cao Cao yu Yang Xiu /uni66灘9/uni64cd與/uni694a/uni4灘ee
Cao Xueqin /uni66灘9/uni96ea/uni82女9
Cao Zhi yu Zeng Luo /uni66灘9/uni690d與/uni66灘e/uni6d由女
Caochuan jiejian 草船/uni50由灘/uni吳女ad
chai diao /uni5c3a/uni8a女灘
chang daxi 唱大戲
chang shu wan liang 唱/uni66灘8/uni5女8c/uni吳ce吳
chang tanghui 唱堂會
Chang Xiangyu /uni5e38香玉
chang xinwen 唱/uni65女0/uni805e
Chang’e /uni5ae6/uni5a25
changgong 唱/uni529灘
changji /uni5a3c妓
Changle 長/uni6a02
Changsheng dian 長/uni吳5由灘/uni6女女灘
changshu 唱/uni66灘8
Changzhou /uni5e38/uni5dde
chayuan 茶園
Chen Dieyi 陳蝶衣
Chen Shulian 陳/uni吳58灘/uni84ee
Chen Wanyuan 陳/uni842c元
Chen Yi 陳/uni6女c5
Chen Yusun 陳/uni865e/uni5女6女
Cheng Changgeng /uni吳a0女長/uni5e9a
Cheng Rong 成/uni5女女9
Cheng Yanqiu /uni吳a0女/uni吳86灘/uni吳9c女
Chinese Character Glossary 

=== PDF PAGE 325 ===

Chenxiang shan /uni6c89香扇
chi /uni5c3a
Chongqing /uni9由cd慶
Chongren /uni5d0吳/uni4ec由
chou /uni4e由由
chuanqi /uni50女3奇
Chuju /uni695a劇
Churen 處/uni4ec由
Cui Yingying /uni5d由4/uni9da灘/uni9da灘
da baobuping 打報/uni4e0d/uni5e吳3
Da piguan 大劈/uni68灘a
Da Shijie 大/uni4e由6/uni吳54c
Dagong bao 大/uni5由6c報
dagu 大/uni9灘由3
Dai Qing 戴晴
“Daiyu fengao” /uni9ed女玉/uni吳由由a/uni吳a3灘
“Daiyu jinfu” /uni9ed女玉進/uni5e9c
“Daiyu zanghua” /uni9ed女玉/uni846c/uni82女由
Dalai Juchang 大/uni4灘86劇場
Danghu chuan 蕩/uni6e56船
Dangren hun /uni9ee8/uni4e女a/uni9女42
Daoguang 道光
dashu 大/uni66灘8
daxi 大戲
Dazhong Jushe 大/uni4e2d劇/uni吳93e
Deng Xiaoping 鄧/uni5c0灘/uni5e吳3
Deng Yingchao 鄧/uni吳a4e/uni8d85
Di Renjie /uni吳2c4/uni4ec由傑
Diantong huabao /uni96灘女/uni90由a/uni吳56女報
diaojiaoxi /uni540a腳戲
diduban 的/uni吳女e4/uni吳3ed
diduxi 的/uni吳女e4戲
difang xi 地/uni65女9戲
Ding Cong /uni4e0由聰
Ding Jingtang /uni4e0由/uni666灘唐
Ding Ling /uni4e0由/uni吳3女2
Ding Shi’e /uni4e0由/uni662灘/uni5a25
Ding Ying /uni4e0由/uni82灘由
Dingjun shan /uni5女9a/uni8ecd/uni5c吳由
Dong Qian 董倩
Dong Tianmin 董天/uni6c由由
Dongyang 東/uni96吳d
Dongzhou lieguo zhi 東周列/uni5吳0女/uni5灘d吳
ducao /uni6女d2草
“Du Xixiang” /uni8女80/uni89吳灘/uni5ec2
Du Yuesheng /uni6吳5c月/uni吳女由9
er nü si qing 兒女/uni吳9c由/錦ni60適5
exing Haipai /錦ni60e1性/錦ni6d77/錦ni6d3e
Fan Li (Dimin) /錦ni6色0色/錦ni7適6適 （/錦ni8木e色/uni6c由由）
Fan Ruijuan /錦ni7b適肅/錦ni7肅5e/錦ni5色1木
Fang mianhua /錦ni7d21/錦ni68適妃/uni82女由
Fang Qing /uni65女9/錦ni537木
Fang Yafen /uni65女9/uni4e9e/uni82ac
Fei Mu /錦ni8適bb/錦ni7色肅6
Feng Jiajin /錦ni5適01/錦ni52色0進
Fengyu tan /錦ni妃8色8/錦ni妃6e8/錦ni8色適7
Fu Quanxiang 傅全香
funü wenti /錦ni5色66女/錦ni55肅木/錦ni妃8肅適
Funü yu wenxue /錦ni5色66女與文/錦ni5b78
Fuzhou /錦ni7妃8木/uni5dde
gan die /錦ni肅e7e爹
gan ma /錦ni肅e7e/錦ni5色bd
ganqing /錦ni611木/錦ni60適5
Gao Jianling /uni9ad8/錦ni528d琳
Gao Jin /uni9ad8/uni吳4吳e
Gao Yilong /uni9ad8/uni吳灘a9/錦ni妃木8d
Gao Yuesheng /uni9ad8月昇
Ge Nenniang /錦ni8肅5b/錦ni5色e妃/錦ni5色18
gezaixi /錦ni6b肅適/錦ni肅ed肅戲
Gong Hede /錦ni妃木妃肅/uni548c/錦ni5木b7
Gu Wenyou 顧文/錦ni53適b
Guaming de fuqi /錦ni63妃b/錦ni5肅0d的/錦ni5妃2b/錦ni5妃bb
Guan Sushuang /錦ni妃5d適肅/uni9吳由c
Guangdong /錦ni5ee3東
Guangxu Di yu Zhenfei 光/錦ni7dd2/錦ni5e1d與
/錦ni73適d妃
gudao /錦ni5b6肅/錦ni5適木6
“Guifei zuijiu” /錦ni8適b肅妃醉酒
“Guihua ting” 桂/uni82女由/錦ni肅e色d
Guiji 會/錦ni7色3d
Guilin 桂林
Guo Moruo /錦ni妃0ed/錦ni6適色b/錦ni82e5
guofang niang /錦ni妃0肅e/錦ni623木/錦ni5色18
guofang ye /錦ni妃0肅e/錦ni623木/錦ni723色
304 Chinese Character Glossary

=== PDF PAGE 326 ===

guojia juyuan /uni5吳0女/uni5女女6劇院
guoju /uni5吳0女劇
Guomindang /uni5吳0女/uni6c由由/uni9ee8
Guopo shanhe zai /uni5吳0女破/uni5c吳由/錦ni6適b3在
Guotai Daxiyuan /uni5吳0女/錦ni6適木0大戲院
guoying jutuan /uni5吳0女/錦ni71d木劇團
Haipai /錦ni6d77/錦ni6d3e
Haipai Jingju /錦ni6d77/錦ni6d3e/錦ni肅e色適劇
Hairui baguan /錦ni6d77/錦ni7肅5e/錦ni7木77/錦ni5b妃8
Han Yi (Hong Jun) /uni9吳d3/uni吳灘a9（/錦ni6d2色/錦ni妃21e）
Hang-Jia-Hu /錦ni676d嘉/uni6e56
Hangju /錦ni676d劇
Hangzhou /錦ni676d/uni5dde
hao kan /uni59吳d/uni吳吳0女
hao ting /uni59吳d/錦ni807d
Haohao xiansheng /uni59吳d/uni59吳d先/uni吳5由灘
He Lunzhang /錦ni肅木55/錦ni502b/錦ni7色e0
He Wenxiu /錦ni肅木55文/錦ni7妃適0
Hebei /錦ni6適b3北
hen mei /錦ni5木88/uni吳灘8e
Hong Shen /錦ni6d2色/錦ni6d木1
Honglou meng /錦ni7d05/uni6a由3夢
Hongse niangzi jun /錦ni7d05色/錦ni5色18/uni5女50/uni8ecd
Hu Feng /錦ni80e1/錦ni妃8色8
Hu Shi /錦ni80e1適
Hu Zhifei /錦ni80e1/錦ni77e5/錦ni妃75e
Hua Mulan /uni82女由木/uni862d
huaben /錦ni8色71/uni6吳2c
huadan /uni82女由/uni65e6
huadeng /uni82女由/錦ni71適8
huagu /uni82女由/uni9灘由3
Huaiju /錦ni6dee劇
Huali yuan /錦ni83e木/uni9e9吳/錦ni7de3
hualian /uni82女由/錦ni81適妃
Huang Jinrong /錦ni妃e適3/錦ni妃1d1/uni69ae
Huang Sha /錦ni妃e適3/錦ni6適妃妃
Huang Zuolin /錦ni妃e適3/錦ni肅木50/錦ni81e8
Huangjin Daxiyuan /錦ni妃e適3/錦ni妃1d1大戲院
Huangmeixi /錦ni妃e適3梅戲
Huangpu (Jiang) /錦ni妃e適3/錦ni6d66（/uni6c5灘）
huangse xiaobao /錦ni妃e適3色/uni5c0灘報
Huangze /錦ni妃e適3/錦ni6木色肅
Huanjin ji /錦ni6d63錦/錦ni8色18
Hudie meng 蝴蝶夢
“Hui shiba” /錦ni56de十/uni5由6女
Huju /錦ni6ee適劇
Hunan /uni6e56南
hunhun e’e /錦ni6e3e/錦ni6e3e噩噩
Huo Dingjin /錦ni妃70d/uni5女9a/錦ni妃1d1
huobao ju /錦ni6d3b報劇
huqin /錦ni80e1琴
Huxi /錦ni6ee適/uni89吳灘
Jia Baoyu /錦ni8適適8/uni5女灘6玉
Jia Guilian /錦ni8適適8桂/uni84ee
jian mian li /錦ni8妃8b面/錦ni7妃色e
Jiang Bo /uni6c5灘/錦ni6適e2
Jiang Laowu xunqing ji 蔣老/錦ni肅e妃肅/錦ni6b8妃
/錦ni60適5/錦ni8色18
Jiang Qing /uni6c5灘青
Jiang Zeming /uni6c5灘/錦ni6木色肅/uni6c由由
Jiangbei /uni6c5灘北
Jiangbeixi /uni6c5灘北戲
Jiangnan /uni6c5灘南
Jiangsu /uni6c5灘蘇
Jianguo ribao /錦ni5e木色/uni5吳0女/錦ni65e5報
Jiangxi /uni6c5灘/uni89吳灘
jiaohua 教化
jiating ju /uni5女女6/錦ni5e色d劇
Jiaxing 嘉興
Jiehun shinian /錦ni7d50/錦ni5色5色十/錦ni5e7肅
jiemei qing /錦ni5妃d0/錦ni5妃b妃/錦ni60適5
jiguan bao /錦ni6色5木/錦ni妃5d適報
Jiming zao kantian /錦ni妃6de/錦ni妃適木肅/錦ni65e妃/uni吳吳0女天
jin /錦ni65色肅
Jin Qibing /錦ni妃1d1其/錦ni70b3
Jin Yuqing /錦ni妃1d1/錦ni80b2青
Jin Zhitang /錦ni妃1d1/錦ni82妃d堂
jinbu liliang 進/錦ni6b65/錦ni52妃b/錦ni妃1適木
jing /錦ni6de8
Jingchao pai /錦ni肅e色適/錦ni671d/錦ni6d3e
Jingju /錦ni肅e色適劇
Jingpai /錦ni肅e色適/錦ni6d3e
Jingu qiguan /錦ni肅e適色/錦ni53e肅奇/錦ni8妃適0
Jinhua /錦ni妃1d1/錦ni83e木
Chinese Character Glossary    305

=== PDF PAGE 327 ===

Jinlong bian /錦ni妃1d1/錦ni妃木8d/錦ni妃7色d
Jinpingmei /錦ni妃1d1/錦ni7肅木6梅
“Jin-Yu liangyuan” /錦ni妃1d1玉/錦ni826木/錦ni7de3
Jiuxing Daxiyuan /錦ni肅e5d/錦ni661木大戲院
jixing 畸/錦ni5木62
Juan She /錦ni5色1木/uni吳93e
juwu bu 劇/錦ni52d妃/錦ni妃0e8
Juzhou /錦ni5適肅5/uni5dde
kan re’nao /uni吳吳0女/錦ni71b1/錦ni妃b27
Kangxi /錦ni5eb7熙
kangzhan wenhua 抗戰文化
keai de shagua /錦ni53e木/uni6由由女的/錦ni50bb/錦ni7肅d適
koutou /錦ni53e妃/錦ni妃82d
Kuaihuo lin /錦ni5木eb/錦ni6d3b林
kuku diao /錦ni5肅ed/錦ni5肅ed/uni8a女灘
“Kuling chuzou” /錦ni5肅ed靈/錦ni51木色/錦ni8d70
Kunming 昆/錦ni660e
Kunqu 昆/錦ni66木2
kuxi /錦ni82e6戲
Lan gu’niang /錦ni61木6/錦ni5妃d1/錦ni5色18
Langdangzi /錦ni6d6色蕩/uni5女50
laodan 老/uni65e6
laosheng 老/uni吳5由灘
Laozha Xiyuan 老閘戲院
Lei sa xiangsi di /錦ni6dd色灑/錦ni76木8/錦ni601d地
Leng Shan ( /錦ni51b7/uni5c吳由)
(Jin Zhaoyuan) /錦ni妃1d1兆元
li 理
Li Chunlai /uni6吳4e春/uni4灘86
Li Gongpu /uni6吳4e/uni5由6c/錦ni6色38
Li Hongzhang /uni6吳4e/錦ni妃d3b/錦ni7色e0
Li Jiang /uni6吳4e/uni6c5灘
Li Jianwu /uni6吳4e健/錦ni5肅3e
Li Taicheng /uni6吳4e/uni592a成
Li Tingfu /uni6吳4e/錦ni5e木7/uni吳52女
Li Xiuying /uni6吳4e/錦ni7妃適0/uni82灘由
Li Yuru /uni6吳4e玉茹
Lian Bo 連/錦ni6適e2
Lian sheng /錦ni806木聲
Liang Shanbo yu /錦ni7適b1/uni5c吳由/錦ni肅木2木與/錦ni7妃5d
Zhu Yingtai /uni82灘由/錦ni81木色
Liang Zhu aishi /錦ni7適b1/錦ni7妃5d/錦ni5肅適0/錦ni53木2
liangzi /uni吳ce吳/uni5女50
Lianhe ribao /錦ni806木合/錦ni65e5報
Lianhe wanbao /錦ni806木合/錦ni665色報
lianhua luozi /uni84ee/uni82女由/錦ni8肅3d/uni5女50
Lianhua nü /uni84ee/uni82女由女
Liao Lin /錦ni5ed6/錦ni81e8
Libai liu /錦ni7妃色e/錦ni62d適/錦ni516d
Lin Daiyu 林/uni9ed女玉
Lin Gu 林/錦ni8適37
Lin Zexu 林則/uni5灘90
Lin’an /錦ni81e8/uni5女89
Lingyu xiangxiao ji /uni吳3女2玉香/錦ni6d88/錦ni8色18
Liu Changsheng 劉長/錦ni52dd
Liu Chen 劉/錦ni8色木6
Liu Housheng 劉/錦ni53妃色/uni吳5由灘
Liu Jinding 劉/錦ni妃1d1/uni5女9a
Liu Shaoqi 劉/錦ni5適11奇
Liu Xiangnü baojuan 劉香女/uni5女灘6卷
Liu Xiao 劉/錦ni66適妃
Liuyin ji /錦ni67木3/錦ni852d/錦ni8色18
Longyou /錦ni妃木8d/錦ni妃0肅色
“Loutai hui” /uni6a由3/錦ni81木色會
Lu Ang /uni吳6e吳昂
Lu Dan’an 陸/錦ni6木b妃/錦ni76e6
Lu Gendi 陸根/錦ni68e3
Lu Shijun /uni吳6e吳時/uni4灘ca
Lu Xun /錦ni妃b6木/錦ni8木適5
Lu Yin /uni吳6e吳/錦ni妃6b1
Lü Zhong 呂/錦ni肅e木2
luantan /錦ni肅e82/錦ni5木肅8
Lüju 呂劇
Lun yanyuan ziwo /錦ni8色d6/戀ni週f14/戀ni54e1/戀ni81ea我
xiuyang /戀ni4f11/戀ni990a
Luohan qian /戀ni7f85/戀ni週f22錢
Luoyang /uni6d由女/uni96吳d
lutou xi /uni8de灘/錦ni妃82d戲
Ma Chaoshui /戀ni99ac/戀ni週f週e/uni6c34
Ma Guafu kaidian /戀ni99ac/戀ni5be1/錦ni5色66/戀ni958b/戀ni5e97
Ma Lianliang /戀ni99ac連/錦ni826木
Ma shi wentong /戀ni99ac/戀ni週c0f文/uni90由a
Ma Wencai /戀ni99ac文/戀ni週24d
Ma Zhanghua /戀ni99ac/戀ni週a1f/uni82女由
306 Chinese Character Glossary

=== PDF PAGE 328 ===

pihuang /戀ni7週ae/錦ni妃e適3
Ping-Hu tongche /uni5e吳3/錦ni6ee適/uni90由a/戀ni8eca
pingju /戀ni8a55劇
pingtan /戀ni8a55/錦ni5木肅8
Pipa ji 琵琶/錦ni8色18
Pu Tong /戀ni週ea5/戀ni4f97
Pudong /錦ni6d66東
Qi Fanniu /戀ni週21a/戀ni98ef/戀ni725b
Qi Rushan /戀ni9f4a如/uni5c吳由
Qi Yaxian /戀ni週21a/戀ni9週c5/戀ni4ed9
Qian Huili 錢/uni60e0/uni9e9吳
Qianjin funü /戀ni524d進/錦ni5色66女
Qianlong /錦ni肅e7e隆
Qiliang Liao gong yue /戀ni週0bd/戀ni週dbc/戀ni907c/戀ni5bae月
Qimei tu /戀ni4e0祖/uni吳灘8e圖
qing /錦ni60適5
qingbai /戀ni週e05/uni吳6吳d
qinglou 青/uni6a由3
qingqing baibai /戀ni週e05/戀ni週e05/uni吳6吳d/uni吳6吳d
zuoren, renren /戀ni505a/uni4e女a，/戀ni8a8d/戀ni8a8d
zhenzhen yanxi /戀ni771f/戀ni771f/戀ni週f14戲
qingyi 青衣
Qiongren hen /戀ni7aae/uni4e女a恨
qipao /戀ni週5d7/戀ni888d
qishi miezu /戀ni週b祖a/uni4e由6/戀ni週ec5祖
Qiu Guangxian /uni88d8/錦ni5ee3/戀ni8ce2
Qiuyue guying /uni吳9c女月/錦ni5b6肅/戀ni5f71
renqing /uni4e女a/錦ni60適5
Renren zhoubao /uni4e女a/uni4e女a週報
renyan kewei /uni4e女a/戀ni8a00/錦ni53e木/戀ni754f
rou /戀ni週7d4
rou mei /戀ni週7d4/uni吳灘8e
rouzi 肉/uni5女50
Ruan Lingyu /戀ni9週2e/uni吳3女2玉
san gai /戀ni4e09改
san hua /戀ni4e09/uni82女由
Sandu /戀ni4e09/戀ni90fd
Sange modeng nüxing /戀ni4e09/戀ni500b摩/戀ni7週7b
女性
Sanguo yanyi /戀ni4e09/uni5吳0女/戀ni週f14/uni吳灘a9
Sanjie /戀ni4e09/uni吳54c
Sankan yumei /戀ni4e09/uni吳吳0女/戀ni5fa1/錦ni5妃b妃
Chinese Character Glossary    307
Mai caotun /戀ni8ce祖草/戀ni5週e4
Mai po ji /戀ni8ce祖/戀ni5a4週/錦ni8色18
Mai qingtan /戀ni8ce祖青/戀ni70ad
mao’erxi /戀ni9ae週兒戲
Matang Cun /戀ni99ac塘村
mei /uni吳灘8e
Mei Baojiu 梅葆玖
Mei Duo 梅朵
Mei Lanfang 梅/uni862d/戀ni82b祖
Meilong  zhen 梅/錦ni妃木8d/戀ni9祖ae
Meng Lijun /戀ni5b5f/uni9e9吳/戀ni541b
Meng Xiaodong /戀ni5b5f/uni5c0灘/戀ni51ac
minban gongzhu /uni6c由由/戀ni8fa週/uni5由6c/戀ni52a9
jutuan 劇團
Mingxing Daxiyuan /錦ni660e/錦ni661木大戲院
Modeng jia’nü 摩/戀ni7週7b袈女
Mu Shiying /錦ni7色肅6時/uni82灘由
mubiao /戀ni5e55表
Mulan 木/uni862d
nan ban 男/uni吳3ed
nan nü heyan 男女合/戀ni週f14
Nan Wei 南薇
nan xiaosheng 男/uni5c0灘/uni吳5由灘
Nanjing 南/錦ni肅e色適
nankan /戀ni9週e祖/uni吳吳0女
Nanshi 南/戀ni5e02
nanxi 南戲
Ningbo /戀ni5be7/錦ni6適e2
nü ban 女/uni吳3ed
Nü Wa 女/戀ni5aa7
nü xi 女戲
nü xiaosheng 女/uni5c0灘/uni吳5由灘
nü xizi 女戲/uni5女50
nü yue 女/uni6a02
Nülan Wuhao 女/戀ni85cd/錦ni肅e妃肅/戀ni8週5f
nüzi Shaoxing 女/uni5女50/uni吳d39興
wenxi 文戲
nüzi Yueju 女/uni5女50/戀ni8d8a劇
Ouyang Yuqian /戀ni週b50/uni96吳d/戀ni4e88倩
Paitou /戀ni724c/錦ni妃82d
Pan Yueqiao /戀ni週f58月/戀ni週a祖5
Panfu suofu /戀ni7週e4/錦ni5妃2b/戀ni7d22/錦ni5妃2b

=== PDF PAGE 329 ===

Sanmen /戀ni4e09門
Sanxiao yinyuan /戀ni4e09/uni吳女由由/戀ni59fb/錦ni7de3
Sanyue chunchao /戀ni4e09月春/戀ni週f週e
Sha Wenhan /錦ni6適妃妃文/戀ni週f22
Shaanxi /戀ni9週5d/uni89吳灘
Shan Yangping /uni55ae/uni4e灘0/uni840d
shandian xiaosheng 閃/uni96灘女/uni5c0灘/uni吳5由灘
Shandong /uni5c吳由東
Shang Fangchen 商/戀ni82b祖/戀ni81e祖
Shang Shuihua 商/uni6c34/uni82女由
Shang Xiaoyun /戀ni5c1a/uni5c0灘/uni96灘2
Shanghai chanye yu /戀ni4e0a/錦ni6d77產/戀ni週9週d與
Shanghai zhigong /戀ni4e0a/錦ni6d77職/戀ni5de5
Shanghai shenghuo /戀ni4e0a/錦ni6d77/uni吳5由灘/錦ni6d3b
Shanghai Yueju zhi /戀ni4e0a/錦ni6d77/戀ni8d8a劇/uni5灘d吳
“Shangshi” /戀ni50b7/戀ni901d
Shangyu /戀ni4e0a/uni865e
Shanhe lian /uni5c吳由/錦ni6適b3戀
Shanhu yin /戀ni7祖ca/戀ni745a/戀ni5f15
Shao Xunmei /戀ni90b5/戀ni5faa/uni吳灘8e
Shaoxing /uni吳d39興
Shaoxing daban /uni吳d39興大/uni吳3ed
Shaoxing wanbao /uni吳d39興/錦ni665色報
Shaoxing wenxi /uni吳d39興文戲
Shaoxing xikao quance /uni吳d39興戲考全/戀ni518a
Shaoxingxi bao /uni吳d39興戲報
Shen bao 申報
Shen Congwen /戀ni週c88/戀ni5f9e文
Shen Fu /戀ni週c88/戀ni週d週e
Shen nü /戀ni795e女
Shen Xiling /戀ni週c88/uni89吳灘/戀ni82d祖
Shengxian /戀ni5d4a/戀ni7e2祖
Shengxian guanhua /戀ni5d4a/戀ni7e2祖/錦ni5b妃8/錦ni8色71
Shengxian zizhi /戀ni5d4a/戀ni7e2祖/戀ni81ea/戀ni週cbb/錦ni7色e0/uni吳a0女
zhangcheng
Shengxianxi /戀ni5d4a/戀ni7e2祖戲
Shengzhou /戀ni5d4a/uni5dde
Shenqu 申/錦ni66木2
shenying shizhe /戀ni795e/戀ni745b/戀ni4f8d者
Shi Dakai /戀ni77f祖達/戀ni958b
Shi Dongshan /錦ni53木2東/uni5c吳由
Shi guguai 十/錦ni53e肅/戀ni週02a
Shi Jihua /錦ni53木2/戀ni週fdf/錦ni83e木
“Shi wo cuo” /uni662灘我/戀ni9祖2f
Shi xiqi 十/戀ni7a00奇
Shi Yinhua /戀ni週5bd銀/uni82女由
Shi Zhecun /戀ni週5bd/戀ni87c4/戀ni5b58
Shiba mo 十/uni5由6女摸
“Shibali xiangsong” 十/uni5由6女/uni9由cc/錦ni76木8送
Shidai ribao 時/戀ni4ee祖/錦ni65e5報
Shijia Ao /戀ni週5bd/uni5女女6/戀ni5db4
shikumen /戀ni77f祖/戀ni5eab門
Shiliupu 十/錦ni516d舖
shimin wenhua /戀ni5e02/uni6c由由文化
Shishi xinbao 時/戀ni4e8b/uni65女0報
Shuang jin hua /戀ni9週d9/錦ni妃1d1/uni82女由
Shuang zhu feng /戀ni9週d9/戀ni7祖e0/戀ni9cf祖
Shuihu zhuan /uni6c34/戀ni週ef8/uni50女3
Shuo Yue quanzhuan /戀ni8aaa/戀ni5cb祖全/uni50女3
shuoxi shifu /戀ni8aaa戲/戀ni5e2b傅
Sichuan /戀ni5週db/戀ni5ddd
sida mingdan /戀ni5週db大/錦ni5肅0d/uni65e6
sida qishu /戀ni5週db大奇/uni66灘8
sigong diao /戀ni5週db/戀ni5de5/uni8a女灘
Sijichun Ban /戀ni5週db/戀ni5b週祖春/uni吳3ed
Siming Shan /戀ni5週db/錦ni660e/uni5c吳由
Sizhou cheng /戀ni週cd7/戀ni週d祖2/戀ni57ce
sizhu /戀ni7d72/戀ni7af9
Song Meiling /uni5女8女/uni吳灘8e/戀ni9f週1
Song Qingling /uni5女8女慶/戀ni9f週1
Song Zhiyou /uni5女8女/uni4e4女由
su /戀ni4fd7
Su Qing 蘇青
Su Jinzou 蘇進鄒
Su San 蘇/戀ni4e09
Subei 蘇北
Sulian Diantai 蘇/錦ni806木/uni96灘女/錦ni81木色
Sun Kexian /uni5女6女/戀ni514b/戀ni54b8
Sun Yu /uni5女6女/戀ni745c
Suzhou 蘇/uni5dde
Tan Xinpei /戀ni8b5a/戀ni94週b/戀ni57f9
tanci /錦ni5木肅8/戀ni8a5e
Tang Degui 唐/錦ni5木b7/錦ni8適b肅
Tang Diyin /戀ni週e週f蒂茵
308 Chinese Character Glossary

=== PDF PAGE 330 ===

Tang Jishan 唐/戀ni5b週祖/戀ni7祖ca
tanhuang 灘/戀ni7c27
Tao Xingzhi 陶/uni884c/錦ni77e5
taofan shu /戀ni8a0e/戀ni98ef/uni66灘8
taofan xi /戀ni8a0e/戀ni98ef戲
Taohua shan 桃/uni82女由扇
taose xinwen 桃色/uni65女0/uni805e
Teng Jiazhen /uni6ed5/uni5女女6/uni632灘
Tian Han 田/戀ni週f22
Tian Xiu 田/錦ni7妃適0
Tianchan Wutai 天/戀ni87fe/戀ni821e/錦ni81木色
Tiandi 天地
Tianjin 天/戀ni週d25
Tianxiang Daxiyuan 天香大戲院
Tixiao yinyuan /戀ni557c/uni吳女由由/戀ni5週e0/錦ni7de3
Tixiao yinyuan tanci /戀ni557c/uni吳女由由/戀ni5週e0/錦ni7de3
/錦ni5木肅8/戀ni8a5e
Tong Lijuan /戀ni7ae5/錦ni7妃色e/錦ni5色1木
Tong Zhiling /戀ni7ae5/戀ni82b7/戀ni82d祖
Tongshang Lüguan /uni90由a商/戀ni週5c5館
tongtian /uni90由a天
tongxing lian /戀ni540c性戀
Tu Xinghua /戀ni5c週0/戀ni週74f/uni82女由
tuqi /戀ni571f/戀ni週c2祖
Wang Anyi /uni吳38女/uni5女89/戀ni週1b週
Wang Chanzhi /uni吳38女/戀ni74a8/錦ni82妃d
Wang Jingwei /戀ni週c週a/戀ni7cbe/uni885女
Wang Jinshui /uni吳38女/錦ni妃1d1/uni6c34
Wang Shifu /uni吳38女/戀ni5be週/uni吳52女
Wang Wenjuan /uni吳38女文/錦ni5色1木
Wang Xiaolai /uni吳38女/錦ni66適妃/戀ni7c5f
Wang Xifeng /uni吳38女熙/戀ni9cf祖
Wang Xinghua /uni吳38女/戀ni週74f/uni82女由
Wang Yulin /uni吳38女玉林
Wang Yurong /uni吳38女玉/戀ni84c9
Wang Zhiping /uni吳38女/uni5灘d吳/uni840d
Wanjia denghuo /uni842c/uni5女女6/錦ni71適8/戀ni70週b
Wanxiang /uni842c/戀ni8c週1
Wei Changsheng /uni9女4灘長/uni吳5由灘
Wei Jinshan /uni9女4灘晉/uni5c吳由
Wei Meiduo /uni9女4灘梅朵
Wei Shaochang /uni9女4灘/uni吳d39/uni660c
Wen Bizheng 文/戀ni5fc5/戀ni週b週祖
Wen Tianxiang 文天祥
Wen Yiduo /uni805e/戀ni4e00/戀ni591a
Wen Zhong /uni805e/錦ni肅e木2（/錦ni妃5d適鍵）
(Guan Jian)
Wencui 文/戀ni7cb9
Wenhui bao 文/戀ni5祖2f報
wenmingxi 文/錦ni660e戲
wenxi 文戲
Wenyi fuxing 文/戀ni85dd/戀ni5fa9興
Wenzhou /戀ni週eab/uni5dde
wenzi xiaobao /戀ni8週8a/uni5女50/uni5c0灘報
wode shenti shi 我的/戀ni8eab/戀ni9ad4/uni662灘
qingbai de /戀ni週e05/uni吳6吳d的
Wu Chen 吳/戀ni741b
Wu Han 吳晗
Wu Kaixian 吳/戀ni958b先
Wu Kang 吳/錦ni5eb7
Wu Ping 吳/uni840d
Wu Xiaolou 吳/uni5c0灘/uni6a由3
Wu Yonggang 吳/戀ni週c祖8/戀ni525b
wugong /戀ni週b週週/uni529灘
Wuhan /戀ni週b週週/戀ni週f22
Wuju /戀ni5a7a劇
wupeng chuan /戀ni70cf/戀ni84ec船
wusheng /戀ni週b週週/uni吳5由灘
Wutai jiemei /戀ni821e/錦ni81木色/錦ni5妃d0/錦ni5妃b妃
xi zhong xi 戲/uni4e2d戲
xia hai /戀ni4e0b/錦ni6d77
Xia Yan /戀ni590f/戀ni884d
Xia Yuerun /戀ni590f月/戀ni週f週4
Xia Yueshan /戀ni590f月/戀ni7祖ca
xiandai xing /戀ni7祖fe/戀ni4ee祖性
xiandai /戀ni7祖fe/戀ni4ee祖
Xiang Jintang /錦ni76木8/錦ni妃1d1堂
Xianglin sao 祥林/戀ni5ac2
xiansheng 先/uni吳5由灘
xiao /戀ni7c2b
xiao baihua /uni5c0灘/戀ni7週7e/uni82女由
Xiao Dangui /戀ni7b71/戀ni4e祖9桂
Xiao fangniu /uni5c0灘/戀ni週5祖e/戀ni725b
xiao shimin /uni5c0灘/戀ni5e02/uni6c由由
Chinese Character Glossary    309

=== PDF PAGE 331 ===

Xiao Wo /uni吳女由由我
Xiao Yueying /戀ni7b71月/uni82灘由
Xiao-Bai Yumei /uni5c0灘/uni吳6吳d玉梅
xiaogeban /uni5c0灘/錦ni6b肅適/uni吳3ed
xiaojie zuojia /uni5c0灘/錦ni5妃d0/戀ni4f5c/uni5女女6
Xiaoshan /戀ni85週d/uni5c吳由
xiaoshu /uni5c0灘/uni66灘8
xiaoxi /uni5c0灘戲
xiban 戲/uni吳3ed
Xie An /戀ni8b1d/uni5女89
Xie Daoyun /戀ni8b1d道/戀ni97de
Xie Jin /戀ni8b1d晉
Xie Tieli /戀ni8b1d鐵/戀ni9a週a
xieyi /戀ni5beb/戀ni週10f
xin guoying jutuan /uni65女0/uni5吳0女/錦ni71d木劇團
Xin nüxing /uni65女0女性
Xin Shijie /uni65女0/uni4e由6/uni吳54c
xin xenxue /uni65女0文/錦ni5b78
Xin Wutai /uni65女0/戀ni821e/錦ni81木色
Xin Yanqiu /uni65女0艷/uni吳9c女
Xin Yueju /uni65女0/戀ni8d8a劇
Xinchang /uni65女0/uni660c
Xindeng /uni65女0/戀ni7週7b
xing 性
xing pengzi 興/戀ni84ec/uni5女50
Xing Yuehong /戀ni90a2月/錦ni7d05
Xinhua ribao /uni65女0/錦ni83e木/錦ni65e5報
xinju /uni65女0劇
Xinmin wanbao /uni65女0/uni6c由由/錦ni665色報
Xinwen bao /uni65女0/uni805e報
xinwenyi /uni65女0文/戀ni85dd/戀ni5de5
gongzuozhe /戀ni4f5c者
xinwenyi qingnian /uni65女0文/戀ni85dd青/錦ni5e7肅
Xishi gui Yue /uni89吳灘/戀ni週5bd/戀ni週b78/戀ni8d8a
xiushen qijia /uni4灘ee/戀ni8eab，/戀ni9f4a/uni5女女6，
zhiguo pingtianxia /戀ni週cbb/uni5吳0女，/uni5e吳3天/戀ni4e0b
Xixiang ji /uni89吳灘/uni5ec2/錦ni8色18
Xiyou ji /uni89吳灘/錦ni妃0肅色/錦ni8色18
xiyuan 戲院
xizi 戲/uni5女50
Xu Datong /uni5灘90大/uni90由a
Xu Fangfeng /uni5灘90/戀ni82b祖/戀ni9cf祖
Xu Guangping /戀ni8a祖1/錦ni5ee3/uni5e吳3
Xu Jin /uni5灘90進
xu shi 敘/戀ni4e8b
Xu Yulan /uni5灘90玉/uni862d
Xue Baochai /uni859女/uni5女灘6/uni91f5
Xue Xie /錦ni5b78協
Xue Yanqin /uni96ea艷琴
Xue Yunhuang /uni859女允/uni吳49c
Xuesheng jinian kan /uni96ea聲/錦ni8色18/uni5ff5/uni520a
Xuesheng shenghuo /錦ni5b78/uni吳5由灘/uni吳5由灘/錦ni6d3b
Xun Huisheng 荀慧/uni吳5由灘
ya /戀ni9週c5
Yan Duhe /uni56b餘獨/uni9卓b餘
Yan Huizhu /戀ni8a00慧/戀ni7祖e0
Yan Lanzhen /uni56b餘/uni862d/uni8c9捉
Yan’an /uni5捉f6/uni5女89
yang gang /uni96吳d/戀ni525b
Yang Guifei /uni694a/錦ni8適b肅妃
Yang Hansheng /uni96吳d/uni7ff0/uni吳女由9
Yang Shaochun /uni694a/錦ni5適11春
Yang Xiaolou /uni694a/uni5c0灘/uni6a由3
Yang Yuelou /uni694a月/uni6a由3
yangge /uni79捉7/錦ni6b肅適
Yangjia jiang /uni694a/uni5女女6/uni5c07
Yangshupu /uni694a/uni6a39/錦ni6d66
Yangxifu hui niangjia /戀ni990a/uni5ab3/錦ni5色66/錦ni56de
/錦ni5色18/uni5女女6
Yangzhou /uni63卓a/uni5dde
yanqing /戀ni8a00/錦ni60適5
Yao Min’ai /uni59卓a/uni6c由由/錦ni5肅適0
Yao Shuijuan /uni59卓a/uni6c34/錦ni5色1木
Ye Qinfang 葉琴/戀ni82b祖
Yi Bing /uni餘f0a兵
Yijiang chunshui /戀ni4e00/uni6c5灘春/uni6c34向
xiang dong liu 東/uni6卓餘1
Yilü ma /戀ni4e00/uni5c62/uni9捉bb
yin 陰
Yin Guifang /uni5c39桂/戀ni82b祖
yin rou 陰/戀ni週7d4
Yin Yicui /uni6bb7/戀ni4e00璀
ying /uni786c
Ying Yunwei /uni61c9/uni96灘2/uni885女
310 Chinese Character Glossary

=== PDF PAGE 332 ===

“Yingtai kuling” /uni82灘由/錦ni81木色/錦ni5肅ed靈
yinshu /uni6卓捉b/uni66灘8
yinxi /uni6卓捉b戲
Yiyang /uni5f0b/uni96吳d
Yongzheng /uni96c卓/戀ni週b週祖
“You Shanglin Yuan” /錦ni妃0肅色/戀ni4e0a林/uni5b9b
yu jiao yu le /uni5b卓3教/uni65bc/uni6a02
Yu lianhuan 玉連/uni7餘b0
Yu Ling /uni餘捉8捉/uni餘f36
Yu Longsun /uni餘f卓捉/錦ni妃木8d/uni5女6女
Yu Qiaqing /uni865e/uni6卓3卓/錦ni537木
Yu Shangyuan (Yui /uni餘f59/戀ni4e0a/uni6c85
Shang-Yuen)
Yu Shuiwen /uni餘f卓捉/uni6c34文
yuan fang 圓/錦ni623木
Yuan Meiyun 袁/uni吳灘8e/uni96灘2
Yuan Xuefen 袁/uni96ea/uni82ac
Yue ou /戀ni8d8a/uni8b33
Yueju /戀ni8d8a劇
Yueju /uni7cb5劇
Yueju bao /戀ni8d8a劇報
Yueju fazhan shu /戀ni8d8a劇/uni767c/uni5c55/uni66灘8
Yueju shijie /戀ni8d8a劇/uni4e由6/uni吳54c
Yueju zhuankan /戀ni8d8a劇/uni5c08/uni520a
Yuhang 餘/錦ni676d
Yuju /uni8c6b劇
Yunnan /uni96灘2南
Yutang Chun 玉堂春
Yuyao 餘/uni59卓a
Yuzan ji 玉/uni吳c2a/錦ni8色18
zaju /uni96卓c劇
Zaochun eryue /錦ni65e妃春/uni餘捉8c月
zaopo /uni7c卓f/uni7c95
Zazhi /uni96卓c/uni8a8c
Zhabei 閘北
Zhan Chengdu 戰成/戀ni90fd
Zhang Ailing /uni5灘35/uni6由由女/uni吳3女2
Zhang Chunfan /uni5灘35春/uni5捉06
Zhang Chunqiao /uni5灘35春/uni6a餘b
Zhang Damin /uni5灘35達/uni6c由由
Zhang Dai /uni5灘35/uni5cb1
Zhang Daofan /uni5灘35道/uni85捉9
Zhang Du /uni5灘35/uni8女80
Zhang Gong /uni5灘35/uni62f1
Zhang Hailing /錦ni7色e0/錦ni6d77靈
Zhang Henshui /uni5灘35恨/uni6c34
Zhang Jinfeng /uni5灘35/錦ni妃1d1/戀ni9cf祖
Zhang Junqiu /uni5灘35/戀ni541b/uni吳9c女
Zhang Junxiang /uni5灘35/uni99ff祥
Zhang Lihui /錦ni7色e0/錦ni52妃b/uni63捉捉
Zhang Linghui /uni5灘35/uni吳3女2蕙
Zhang Rongbiao /uni5灘35/uni69ae/uni6a由9
Zhang Ruihong /錦ni7色e0/錦ni7肅5e虹
Zhang Xiangqing /uni5灘35/錦ni76木8/錦ni537木
Zhang Xingzhou /uni5灘35/uni884c周
Zhang Yanqiu /uni5灘35/uni8c54/uni吳9c女
Zhang Yongmei /uni5灘35/戀ni週c祖8梅
Zhang Yunbiao /uni5灘35/uni96灘2/uni6a由9
Zhang Zaiyang /uni5灘35/uni8f09/uni96吳d
Zhang Zhiyi /uni5灘35/uni57f7/戀ni4e00
Zhang Zifan /uni5灘35/uni5女50/錦ni7b適肅
zhanghui ti /錦ni7色e0/錦ni56de/戀ni9ad4
Zhao Jingshen /uni8卓99/uni666灘/錦ni6d木1
Zhao Naixue /uni8卓99耐/uni96ea
Zhao Ruihua /uni8卓99/錦ni7肅5e/uni82女由
Zhao Zhigang /uni8卓99/uni5灘d吳/戀ni525b
Zhedong Daxiyuan /uni6卓59東大戲院
Zhejiang /uni6卓59/uni6c5灘
Zheng Chuanjian /uni9由2d/uni50女3鑒
Zheng Guofeng /uni9由2d/uni5吳0女/戀ni9cf祖
Zhenguan shengshi /uni8c9捉/錦ni8妃適0/uni76卓b/uni4e由6
Zhenzhu ta /錦ni73適d/戀ni7祖e0塔
Zhong Min /uni937捉/uni6c捉f
Zhongguo Daxiyuan /uni4e2d/uni5吳0女大戲院
Zhonghun qu /uni5灘e0/uni9女42/錦ni66木2
Zhongsheng dashi /uni7卓餘2/uni吳5由灘大/戀ni4e8b
Zhongyang ribao /uni4e2d/uni592捉/錦ni65e5報
Zhou bao 週報
Zhou Baocai 周/uni5女灘6/uni8ca由
Zhou Baokui 周/uni5女灘6/uni594e
Zhou Enlai 周恩/uni4灘86
Zhou Shoujuan 周瘦/uni9卓51
Zhou Wang yu Daji /uni7卓02/uni吳38女與/uni59b2/uni5卓f1
Zhou Xinfang 周/uni餘f捉1/戀ni82b祖
Chinese Character Glossary    311

=== PDF PAGE 333 ===

Zhou Xuan 周璇
Zhu Chunhua /uni吳a灘a春/uni82女由
Zhu Shuizhao /uni吳a灘a/uni6c34/uni62卓b
Zhu Xiangyun 朱/uni7f卓餘/uni96灘2
zhu xuanlü /uni餘捉3b/uni65cb/uni5f8b
Zhu Yunlai 朱/uni96灘2/uni8餘0a
zhuangyuan /uni72c0元
“Zhufu” /錦ni7妃5d/錦ni7妃8木
Zhuge Liang /uni8af8/錦ni8肅5b/uni餘捉a捉
Zhuji /uni8af8/uni66a8
Zhujia Zhuang /錦ni7妃5d/uni5女女6/uni838a
Zhuo Wenjun 卓文/戀ni541b
Zhuofang Cao 捉/戀ni週5祖e/uni66灘9
Ziluolan /uni7卓2b/uni863f/uni862d
Ziyou ren /戀ni81ea由/uni4e女a
zuogong /戀ni505a/uni529灘
312 Chinese Character Glossary

=== PDF PAGE 334 ===

313
References
Arkush, R. David. 1989. “Love and Marriage in North Chinese Peasant Operas.” In Perry
Link, Richard Madsen, and Paul G. Pickowicz, eds., Unofﬁcial China: Popular Culture and
Thought in the People’s Republic. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Bai Mao. 1940. “Gei gudao yingye de congshizhe” (To the ﬁlm industry workers in “island”
Shanghai). Xiju yu wenxue (Drama and literature), vol. 1, no. 4 (June). 
Bender, Mark. 1999. “Shifting and Performance in Suzhou Chantefable.” In Vibeke  Bordahl,
ed., The Eternal Storyteller: Oral Literature in Modern China. Richmond, England: Curzon Press.
Bensen, Carlton. 1995. “The Manipulation of Tanciin Radio Shanghai during the 1930s.”
Republican China, vol. 20, no. 2 (April). 
Bian, Morris L. 2005. The Making of the State Enterprise System in Modern China: The Dynamics
of Institutional Change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Butler, Judith. 1993. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex.”New York: Routledge.
Cao Xueqin. Qing dynasty. Honglou meng (Dream of the red chamber).
Chen Fengyuan (Chin H¯ogen). 1939. Shin Shina soby¯o (A literary sketch of the new China).
Taipei: Taiwan Xinmin bao she. 
Chen, Jack. 1949. The Chinese Theatre. London: Dennis Dobson. 
Chen Qingsheng. 1995. Kang Ri zhanzheng shiqi de Shanghai wenxue (Wartime literature in
Shanghai). Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe.
Chen Xi. 1941. “Wo yu Yueju de yijian” (My opinion of Yue opera). Shen bao, May 3.
Chen, Yixin. 2004. “Understanding Twentieth Century China—An Interview with William
Kirby.” The Chinese Historical Review, vol. 11, no. 1 (Spring).
Chen Zhengxiang (Chen Cheng-Siang). 1970. Shanghai (Shanghai). Research Report,
no. 38, Geographical Research Centre, Graduate School, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong. 
Cheng, Weikun. 1996. “The Challenge of the Actresses: Female Performers and Cultural
Alternatives in Early Twentieth Century Beijing and Tianjin.” Modern China, vol. 22,
no. 2 (April).

=== PDF PAGE 335 ===

Cheng Yanqiu zhuanji (A special issue dedicated to Cheng Yanqiu). 1938. Edited by Wu
Jiangfeng. Shanghai: Huangjin Daxiyuan. 
Cihai. 1989. Reprinted in reduced format. Shanghai: Shanghai cishu chubanshe, 1997 . 
Cole, James. 1986. Shaoxing: Competition and Cooperation in Nineteenth-Century China. Tucson: Uni-
 versity of Arizona Press.
Dagong bao (Dagong daily). 1940s. Shanghai. 
Danghu chuan(The river boat). [1920s?] Ningbo-storytelling script. Shanghai: Renhexiang
shuzhuang.
Ding Jingtang. 1982. “Xianglin sao—Lu Xun zuopin zhong zhi nüxing yanjiu zhi yi: Fuji”
(Sister Xianglin—A study of female characters in Lu Xun’s work: An appendix). In
Xuexi Lu Xun zuopin de zaji (Notes on my studies of Lu Xun’s work), enlarged edition.
Shanghai: Wenyi chubanshe, 1983.
———. 1995. “Wu Kang, ni zoude taizao!” (Wu Kang, you died too early!) In Huainian
Wu Kang tongzhi (Memories of comrade Wu Kang). Edited and published by the edi-
torial committee, Shanghai.
Ding Yi. 1992a. “Xiaogeban de diyici yanchu” (The initial staging of little opera). In Yueju
suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera), edited by Shengxian Zhengxie Wenshi
Ziliao Weiyuanhui, 26–32. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she. 
———. 1992b. “Yueju Liang Zhu de youlai he fazhan” (The origin and development of
the Yue opera Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue
opera), edited by Shengxian Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui, 234–40. Hangzhou:
Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
Ding Ying (pen name of Ding Jingtang). 1945. “Xianglin sao—Lu Xun zuopin zhong
zhi nüxing yanjiu zhi yi” (Sister Xianglin—A study of the female characters in Lu
Xun’s work). Originally published in Qianjin funü (The progressive women), vol. 2
(November). 
———. February 1946. Funü yu wenxue (Women and literature). Shanghai: Hujiang
chubanshe.
Esherick, Joseph. 1987 . The Origins of the Boxer Uprising. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press.
Fan Ruijuan. 1989. “Wo yan Liang Shanbo” (How I performed the character Liang Shanbo).
In Wu Zhaofen, ed., Fan Ruijuan biaoyan yishu (Fan Ruijuan’s performing art). Shang-
hai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe. 
———. 1994. “Yueju gaige de yiwei gongchen—Yi Nan Wei xiansheng” (A contributor
to Yue opera reform—Recollections about Mr. Nan Wei). In Gao Yilong and Lu Shi-
jun, Chongxin zouxiang huihuang: Yueju gaige wushi zhounian lunwen ji(Resume the past glory:
A collection of essays dedicated to the ﬁfth anniversary of Yue opera reform). Bei-
jing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
Fang Hairu and Li Yaokun. 1983. “Dui fazhan nan nü heyan Yueju de jidian kanfa” (A few
points on developing gender-straight Yue opera). In Yishu yanjiu ziliao (Sources for
research in art), vol. 6. Hangzhou: Zhejiang yishu yanjiu suo.
314 References

=== PDF PAGE 336 ===

Fanghua jukan: Yin Guifang zhuanji(Fanghua company home magazine: A special issue ded-
icated to Yin Guifang). June 1947 . Shanghai: Fanghua jutuan chubanshe.
Frith, Simon. 1988. “Art Ideology and Pop Practice.” In Cary Nelson and Lawrence Gross-
berg, eds., Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture, 22–23. London: Macmillan.
Fu Jun. 1995. “Ji Yin Guifang siyan Honglou Meng” (Yin Guifang in her four times of act-
ing in Dream of the red chamber ). In Li Huikang, ed., Yidai fengliu Yin Guifang (The great
actress Yin Guifang). Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Fu, Poshek. 1993. Passivity, Resistance, and Collaboration: Intellectual Choices in Occupied Shang-
hai, 1937–1945 . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
———. 2003. Between Shanghai and Hong Kong: The Politics of Chinese Cinemas . Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fu Quanxiang. 1989. Kanke qianmian shi meijing (Beautiful future comes after many hard-
ships and frustrations). Shanghai: Baijia chubanshe.
Fuller, Peter. 1980. Beyond the Crisis in Art. London: Writers and Readers.
Furth, Charlotte. 1999. A Flourishing Yin: Gender in China’s Medical History, 960–1665. Berke-
ley: University of California Press.
Gaimush¯o k¯obun (Ofﬁcial documents of the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs). 1930s
and 1940s. Nippon Gaisei Ky¯okai. Tokyo.
Gao Yilong. 1991. Yueju shihua (The story of Yue opera). Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi
chubanshe.
Gao Yilong and Lu Shijun, eds. 1994. Chongxin zouxiang huihuang: Yueju gaige wushi  zhou -
nian lunwen ji (Resume the past glory: A collection of essays dedicated to the ﬁfth
anniversary of Yue opera reform). Beijing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
Goldstein, Joshua. 1999a. “Theatrical Imagi-nations: Peking Opera and China’s Cultural
Crisis, 1890–1937 .” Ph.D. diss., University of California, San Diego.
———. 1999b. “Mei Lanfang and the Nationalization of Peking Opera, 1912–1930.”
positions: east asia cultures critique, vol. 7, no. 2 (Fall).
Gong Hede. 1994. “Xuanzexing de chongxin jian’gou—Tan Yueju de xingcheng jiqi yiyi”
(Selective reconstruction—On the signiﬁcance of the formation of Yue opera). In Gao
Yilong and Lu Shijun, eds., Chongxin zouxiang huihuang: Yueju gaige wushi zhounian lunwen
ji (Resume the past glory: A collection of essays dedicated to the ﬁfth anniversary of
Yue opera reform). Beijing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
Goodman, Bryna. 1995. Native Place, City, and Nation: Regional Networks and Identity in Shang-
hai, 1853–1937 . Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Hall, Stuart. 1980. “Cultural Studies at the Centre: Some Problematics and Problems.”
In Stuart Hall, D. Hobson, A. Lowe, and P. Willis, eds., Culture, Media, Language, 15–
47 . London: Hutchinson.
Hamada Maya. 1993. “Josei sakka ni yoru rinkanki Shanhai no nichijo ¯ to mujun” (Women
writers in occupied Shanghai). Yas¯o (The weeds), no. 52 (August). Tokyo. 
Hayford, Charles Wishart. 1990. T o the People: James Yen and Village China. New York: Colum-
bia University Press.
References    315

=== PDF PAGE 337 ===

He Keren. 1935. Ruan Lingyu aishi(A tragic biography of Ruan Lingyu). Shanghai: Xiangzhi
Shuju. Edited and reprinted in He Keren et al., Ruan Lingyu zhisi (The death of Ruan
Lingyu). Changsha: Yuelu shushe, 1986. 
He Keren et al. 1986. Ruan Lingyu zhisi(The death of Ruan Lingyu). Changsha: Yuelu shushe.
Henriot, Christian. 2001. Prostitution and Sexuality in Shanghai: A Social History, 1849–1949 .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hershatter, Gail. 1997 . Dangerous Pleasures: Prostitution and Modernity in Twentieth-Century Shang-
hai. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Honig, Emily. 1986. Sisters and Strangers: Women in Shanghai’s Cotton Mills. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press.
———. 1993. Creating Chinese Ethnicity . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hu Sha. 1982. Pingju jianshi (A brief history of ping opera). Beijing: Zhongguo xiju
chubanshe.
Huang, Nicole. 2005. Women, War, Domesticity: Shanghai Literature and Popular Culture of the
1940s. Leiden and Boston: Brill Academic Publisher.
Huang Sha. 1983. “Yueju fengge de jicheng yu fazhan” (Carry on and develop Yue opera
aesthetics). In Yishu yanjiu ziliao (Sources for research in art), vol. 6. Hangzhou: Zhe-
jiang yishu yanjiu suo.
Hung, Chang-tai. 1994. War and Popular Culture: Resistance in Modern China, 1937–1945. Berke-
ley: University of California Press.
Jiang Jin. 2005. “Duanlie yu yanxu: 1950 niandai Shanghai de wenhua gaizao” (Rupture
and continuity: Cultural transformation in Shanghai in the 1950s). Shehui kexue(Jour-
nal of social sciences), vol. 298 (June): 95–103. 
Jiang, Jin. 2001. “‘Times Have Changed; Men and Women Are the Same.’” In Zhong
Xueping, Wang Zheng, and Bai Di, eds., Some of Us: Chinese Women Growing up in the Mao
Era, 100–119 . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Jiang Zhikang. 1995. “Guanzhong yanli de Yin Guifang” (Yin Guifang in the eyes of the
audience). In Li Huikang, ed., Yidai fengliu Yin Guifang(The great actress Yin Guifang).
Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Jin Chunming. 2001. Zhonghua Renming Gongheguo jian shi (A brief history of the People’s
Republic of China). Beijing: Zhonggong dangshi chubanshe.
Jin Xiangyin. 1992. “Nüzi Yueju diyi ban—Shi Jia Ao nüban” (The ﬁrst women’s Yue opera
troupe—Girls’ school from Shi Village). In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue
opera), edited by Shengxian Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui, 50–67 . Hangzhou:
Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
Jones, Andrew F. 2001. Yellow Music: Media Culture and Colonial Modernity in the Chinese Jazz
Age. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Jones, Susan Mann. 1974. “The Ningbo Pang and Its Financial Power at Shanghai.” In
Mark Elvin and William Skinner, eds., The Chinese City between Two Worlds. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Karl, Rebecca. 2002. Staging the World: Chinese Nationalism at the Turn of the Twentieth Century.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
316 References

=== PDF PAGE 338 ===

Ke Ling. 1994. Ke Ling sanwen jingbian (The best selection of essays by Ke Ling). 2 vol-
umes. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chubanshe.
Ko, Dorothy. 1994. Teachers of the Inner Chambers, Women and Culture in Seventeenth-Century China.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Lanyun ji (The music of the orchid: A special issue dedicated to Xu Yulan). 1948. Edited
by Shou Yaozong, Xu Zhiyuan, Zhang Zibai, and Zhang Shouju. Shanghai: Lukaiji
shubaoshe.
Larson, Wendy. 1998. Women and Writing in Modern China.Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer -
sity Press.
Lee, Leo Ou-Fan. 1999. Shanghai Modern: The Flowering of a New Urban Culture in China, 1930–
1945. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Levenson, Joseph. 1958. Confucian China and Its Modern Fate. Vol. 3, The Problem of Historical
Signiﬁcance. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Li, Hsiao-T’i. 1996. “Opera, Society and Politics: Chinese Intellectuals and Popular Cul-
ture, 1901–1937 .” Ph.D. diss., Harvard University. 
Li Huikang, ed. 1995. Yidai fengliu Yin Guifang (The great actress Yin Guifang). Shanghai:
Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Li Jinfeng. 1995. “He Yin tuanzhang xiangchu de rizi” (The days I spent with Yin Guifang,
the head of the company). In Li Huikang, ed., Yidai fengliu Yin Guifang(The great actress
Yin Guifang). Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe. 
Lian Bo. 1983. “Cong yinyue changqiang shitan juzhong fengge” (Discussing Yue opera
aesthetics in terms of music and singing). In Yishu yanjiu ziliao (Sources for research
in art), vol. 6. Hangzhou: Zhejiang yishu yanjiu suo.
Liang Shanbo: Shi’er ge yue huaming(The story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai in twelve-
month ﬂowers). [1930s?] Shuzhou, Jiangsu: Hengzhi shushe.
Liang Shanbo baojuan (The Buddhist treasury story about Liang Shanbo). Spring 1924.
Suzhou story-singing script. Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi shuju.
Liang Shanbo yu Zhu Yingtai (Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). [1920s?] Shanghai story-
telling script. 3 volumes. Shanghai: Shanghai renhexiang shuju. 
Liang Shanbo yu Zhu Yingtai (Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). 1955. Yue opera script.
Adapted by Xu Jin, Song Zhiyou, Chen Yu, Cheng Rong, and Hong Ying. Shanghai:
Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Liang Shanbo yu Zhu Yingtai(Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). 1979. Yue opera script. Nar-
rated by Yuan Xuefen and Fan Ruijuan. Adapted by Xu Jin et al. Shanghai: Shanghai
wenyi chubanshe.
Liang Shanbo yu Zhu Yingtai fufu gongshu huanhun tuanyuan ji (A story about the reincarna-
tions of the couple Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). [1920s?] 2 volumes. Shanghai:
Shanghai chunyin shuzhuang. 
Liang Shanbo Zhu Yingtai quanzhuan: Aiqing xiaoshuo(Love story: The complete story of Liang
Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). 1935. By Ma Weishi. Shanghai: Shanghai xiaoshuoshe.
Link, Perry. 1981. Mandarin Ducks and Butterﬂies, Popular Fiction in Early Twentieth Century Chi-
nese Cities. Berkeley: University of California Press.
References    317

=== PDF PAGE 339 ===

Liu Qikui. 1987 . “Wang wei hanjian wenhua gaishu” (An outline of the Wang Jingwei
puppet government’s collaboration culture). In Wang Jingwei hanjian zhengquan de xing-
wang (The rise and fall of the Wang Jingwei puppet government), edited by the Mod-
ern History Division of the Department of History, Fudan University. Shanghai: Fudan
University Press.
Liu Wanzhang. 1940. Mulan’ge zhu(Annotated Mulan lyric prose). Changsha, Hunan: Com-
mercial Press.
Liujin suiyue: Huaijiu lao yuefenpai guanggao huazhan(An exhibition of nostalgic posters). 1996.
National Museum of History, Taipei.
Liuyin ji (Liang Shanbo yu Zhu Yingtai). [1930s?] Sichuan opera script. In Suqu (Collec-
tion of opera scripts). Preserved in Fu Ssu-nien Library, Institute of History and Philol-
ogy, Academia Sinica, Taipei.
Lu Gong, comp. 1955. Liang Zhu gushi shuochang ji(A collection of various versions of the
story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai in storytelling traditions). Shanghai: Shang-
hai chuban gongsi.
Lu, Hanchao. 1995. “Away From Nanking Road: Small Stores and Neighborhood Life in
Modern Shanghai.” The Journal of Asian Studies, vol. 54, no. 1 (February).
———. 1999. Beyond the Neon Lights: Everyday Shanghai in the Early Twentieth Century . Berke-
ley: University of California Press.
Lu Xun. 1922. “She xi” (Community opera shows). In Na han (The war cry). Shanghai:
Shanghai renmin chubanshe, 1973.
———. 1924. Zhu fu (The New Year’s sacriﬁce). Hong Kong: Chao Yang Publishing, 1973.
———. 1935. “Lun ‘Renyan kewei’” (On “Gossip is frightening”). In He Keren et al., Ruan
Lingyu zhisi (The death of Ruan Lingyu). Changsha: Yuelu shushe, 1986.
Luo Di. 1991. Xiqu yu Zhejiang (Opera and Zhejiang). Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin
chubanshe. 
Luo Suwen. 1993. “Lun jindai xiqu yu dushi jumin” (Modern theater and city dwellers).
In Shanghai yanjiu luncong (Research on Shanghai series), vol. 9. Shanghai: Shanghai
Academy of Social Sciences Press.
———. 2005. “Gender on Stage: Actresses in an Actor’s World (1895–1930).” In Bryna
Goodman and Wendy Larson, eds., Gender in Motion, 75–96. New York: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld Publishers. 
Luobinhan (Robin Hood). 1940s. Shanghai.
Lyell, William A., trans. 1997 . Shanghai Express. Translated from Zhang Henshui,Ping-Hu
tongche. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Ma Chaoshui. 1960. Yueju fazhan shu (On the early development of Yue opera). Manu-
script in the Shengxian Yue Opera Museum.
Ma Guafu kaidian(Widow Ma’s inn). 1944. Yue opera script. Diduban Yueju dawang: Shaoxing
wenxi jiaoben huibian(King of diduYue opera: Collection of plays in Shaoxing civil opera).
Shanghai: Yimin shuju.
Ma Longwen and Mao Dazhi. 1982. Hebei bangzi jianshi (A short history of Hebei clap-
per opera). Beijing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
318 References

=== PDF PAGE 340 ===

Ma Shaobo, adapt. 1949. Mulan congjun (Mulan entering the army). Shanghai: Xinhua
shudian.
Mackerras, Colin. 1972. The Rise of the Peking Opera, 1770–1870—Social Aspects of the Theatre
in Manchu China. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
MacPherson, Kerrie. 1998. Asian Department Stores. Richmond, Surrey, England: Curzon Press. 
Mann, Susan. 1984. “Urbanization and Historical Change in China.” Modern China, vol.
10, no. 1.
———. 1987 . “Widows in the Kinship, Class, and Community Sturctures of Qing Dynasty
China.” Journal of Asian Studies , vol. 46, no. 1 (February): 37–56.
———. 1994. “The Cult of Domesticity in Republican Shanghai’s Middle Class.” In
Research on Women in Modern Chinese History, vol. 3, edited and published by the Insti-
tute of Modern History, Academia Sinica, Taipei. 
———. 1997 . Precious Records: Women in China’s Long Eighteenth Century. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press.
Mei Lanfang. 1954. Wutai shenghuo sishi nian (Forty years of my career on the stage).
Recorded and edited by Xu Jichuan. Shanghai: Pingmin Publishing House.
Mulan congjun: Jiuguo Pingju (Mulan entering the army: A patriotic Beijing opera). 1938.
Nanchang, Jiangxi: Qianfeng she.
Murphey, Rhoads. 1953.Shanghai, Key to Modern China.Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer -
sity Press.
Nishimura Shigeo. 2004. Niju¯ seiki chu¯ goku no seiji ku¯ kan: “Chu¯ ka minzokuteki kokumin kokka” no
gy¯ oshukuryoku (Political space in twentieth-century China: The binding power of “a
citizen state of the Chinese nation”). Tokyo: Aoki shoten. Nü sheng (Women’s voice
magazine). Monthly, 1942–46. Shanghai. 
O¯ ki Yasushi. 1989. Minzoku shu¯ ky¯o to gein¯o: Gein¯oshi kara mita Chu¯ goku to n¯oson no k¯oryu ¯(Pop-
ular religion and entertainment: A preliminary inquiry on the urban-rural interchanges
in China viewed through entertainment history). T¯ oy¯o bunka, no. 69 (October). Tokyo:
To¯yo¯ Bunka Kenkyu¯j o .  
Overmyer, Daniel L. 1985. “Values in Chinese Sectarian Literature: Ming and Ch’ing Pao-
chüan.” In David Johnson, Andrew Nathan, and Evelyn Rawski, eds., Popular Culture in
Late Imperial China. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Perry, Elizabeth J. 1993. Shanghai on Strike: The Politics of Chinese Labor. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press.
Pickowicz, Paul G. 1993. “The ‘May Fourth’ Tradition of Chinese Cinema.” In Ellen Wid-
mer and David Der-wei Wang, eds., From May Fourth to June Fourth: Fiction and Film in
Twentieth-Century China. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Qi Rushan. 1964. Qi Rushan quanji(The complete works of Qi Rushan). 8 volumes. Taipei:
Chongguang chubanshe.
Qi Yaxian. 1992. Qi Yaxian biaoyan yishu (Qi Yaxian’s performing art). Edited by Fu Jun.
Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Qian Nanyang, comp. 1956. Liang Zhu xiju jicun(A collection of rare opera scripts of Liang
Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai). Shanghai: Shanghai gudian wenxue chubanshe.
References    319

=== PDF PAGE 341 ===

Qian Yonglin. 1992. “Xiaogeban sanjin Shanghai” (Three attempts to enter Shanghai by
Shengxian little opera). In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera), edited by
Shengxian Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui, 42–49. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi
chuban she.
Qiu Wenguang. 1977 . “Yueju suoyi” (Miscellaneous recollections of Yue opera). Zhejiang
yuekan(Zhejiang monthly), vol. 98 (June). Taipei: Taiwan Zhejiang Native-Place Orga-
nization. Also in Qiu Yawei, ed. 1986. Yihuai Shengxian(Memories of Shengxian). Taipei:
Taipei Shengxian Native-Place Organization.
———. 1985. “Zuile xiashi ling xiangying” (Listening to native tones is my favorite hobby).
Zhejiang yuekan (Zhejiang monthly), vol. 192 (April). Taipei: Taiwan Zhejiang Native-
Place Organization. Also in Qiu Yawei, ed. 1986. Yihuai Shengxian(Memories of Sheng-
xian). Taipei: Taipei Shengxian Native-Place Organization.
Qiu Yawei, ed. 1986. Yihuai Shengxian (Memories of Shengxian). Taipei: Taipei Sheng-
xian Native-Place Organization.
Ren Wensi. 1992. “‘Luodi changshu’ fayuandi Matang Cun kaocha” (Field investigation
at Horse Pond Village, where Shengxian story-singing originated). In Yueju suyuan (Trac-
ing the origins of Yue opera), edited by Shengxian Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuan-
hui, 1–17 . Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
Rowe, William. 1989. Hankow: Conﬂict and Community in a Chinese City, 1796–1895. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Rui Heshi and Fan Boqun. 1984. Yuanyang hudie pai wenxue ziliao(Material of the butterﬂy
school literature). Fuzhou: Fujian renmin chubanshe.
Sanxiao yinyuan (Marriage resulted from three smiles). 1930s. Women’s Shengxian opera
script. Shanghai: Yimin shuju.
Sekko zaibatsu (The Zhejiang ﬁnancial magnates). October 15, 1929. In Shanhai Mantetsu
ch¯osa shiry¯o (Investigation materials of the Shanghai ofﬁce of the Southern Manchuria
Railway Company), vol. 6. Shanghai. 
Shanghai chunqiu(Spring and autumn in Shanghai). 1948. Reprinted in Shili Yangchang hua Shang-
 hai(Speaking about colonial Shanghai). Hong Kong: Modern Publishing House, 1970.
Shanghai geming wenhua dashi ji, 1937–1949 (A chronicle of the development of revolution-
ary culture in Shanghai, 1937–1949). 1991. Zhonggong Shanghai Shiwei Dangshi
 Ziliao Zhengji Weiyuanhui, Zhonggong Shanghai Shiwei Dangshi Yanjiushi, and
Zhonggong Shanghai Shiwei Xunchuanbu Dangshi Ziliao Zhengji Weiyuanhui (Com-
mittee for Collecting Historical Materials on Party History, Shanghai Committee of
the Chinese Communist Party, et al.). Shanghai: Shanghai fanyi chuban gongsi.
Shanghai gonggong zujie shigao(History of the international settlement in Shanghai). 1980.
Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe, 1984.
Shanghai Huaiju zhi (Shanghai Huai opera gazetteer). 1998. Edited and published by the
Historical and Gazetteer Editorial Board, Shanghai Cultural Affairs Bureau, and the
Shanghai Huaiju zhi editorial board. 
Shanghai Huju zhi (Shanghai Shanghai opera gazetteer). 1999. Edited by Wang Pei, Chen
Jianyun, and Lan Liu. Shanghai: Shanghai wenhua chubanshe.
320 References

=== PDF PAGE 342 ===

Shanghai jiefang qianhou wujia ziliao huibian (1921 nian–1957 nian)(Commodity prices in Shang-
hai before and after the liberation [1921–1957]). 1958. Edited by the Shanghai Insti-
tute for Economic Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Institute for Economic
Research, and the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences. Shanghai: Shanghai ren-
min chubanshe.
Shanghai Jingju zhi (Shanghai Beijing opera gazetteer). 1999. Edited by Xu Xingjie and
Cai Shicheng. Shanghai: Shanghai wenhua chubanshe.
Shanghai shenghuo (Shanghai life). Yan Duhe, honorary editor. Published monthly start-
ing in 1936. Shanghai. 
Shanghai Shi Shehui Ju dang’an (Archival documents of the Social Bureau of the Shanghai
Municipal Government). 1946–49. Shanghai Municipal Archives.
Shanghai Shi Wenhua Ju dang’an (Archival documents of the Shanghai Cultural Affairs
Bureau). 1949–66. Shanghai Municipal Archives.
Shanghai Tebieshi Gongyongju (Bureau of Public Services, Shanghai Special Munici-
pality). 1941. Zhonghua Minguo sanshi nian shangbannian yewu baogao(Business report for
the ﬁrst half of 1941). Shanghai. 
———. January 1943. Zhonghua Minguo sanshiyi nian yewu baogao (Business report for 1942).
Shanghai. 
Shanghai yanjiu ziliao(Sources for research on Shanghai). 1935. Compiled by Shanghaitong
She. Shanghai: Shanghaitong She.
Shanghai yanjiu ziliao xuji(The second volume of sources for research on Shanghai). 1937 .
Compiled by Shanghaitong She. Shanghai: Shanghaitong She.
Shanghai Yueju gaige wushinian tekan, 1942–1992 (Special issue to commemorate the ﬁftieth
anniversary of Yue opera reform, 1942–1992). 1992. Edited by Lu Shijun.
Shanghai Yueju zhi (Shanghai Yue opera gazetteer). 1995. Unpublished draft. Compiled
by The Editorial Committee. 4 volumes. Shanghai.
Shanghai Yueju zhi (Shanghai Yue opera gazetteer). 1997 . Edited by Lu Shijun and Gao
Yilong. Beijing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
Shanghai zhi (Shanghai gazetteer). 1946. In the library of the Institute of Modern His-
tory, Academia Sinica, Taipei. 
Shanhai Mantetsu kikan (The Shanghai Southern Manchuria Railway quarterly). 1937–45.
Compiled by Minami Manshu¯ Tetsudo¯ Kabushiki Gaisha Shanhai Jimusho (Shang-
hai ofﬁce of the Southern Manchuria Railway Company). Shanghai.
“Shanhai ni okeru senso¯gyo¯ no jo¯ kyo¯” (An investigation of Shanghai’s native banks). 1941.
Shanhai (Shanghai), vol. 1013 (December). Shanghai. 
“Shaoxing shangbao” liangzhounian jinian tekan (A special issue for the second anniversary of
Shaoxing commercial daily). October 1935. Shaoxing: Shaoxing shangbao she.
“Shaoxing shangbao” niankan (The annual magazine of Shaoxing commercial daily), vol. 2. 1935.
Shaoxing: Shaoxing shangbao she.
Shaoxing wanbao (Shaoxing evening news). 1935. Shaoxing, Zhejiang.
Shaoxing wenxi nüzi changzuo diduban(Women’s didu opera, Shaoxing civil opera). Mid-1940s.
31 volumes. Shanghai: Yimin shuju. 
References    321

=== PDF PAGE 343 ===

Shaoxing zhi sichou (The silk industry of Shaoxing). January 1937 . Published by Jianshe
Weiyuanhui Jingji Diaochazu Tongjike (Statistics Division, Economic Investigation
Department, Committee on Construction).
Shaoxingxi bao (Shaoxing opera daily). January–March 1941. Shanghai. 
Shaoxingxi kao (Shaoxing opera scripts). 1939. Shanghai: Shanghai Yuesheng chubanshe,
1942.
She Huimin. 1992. “Yueju Biyu zande jici gaibian” (Revisions of the Yue opera play Emer-
ald hairpin). In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera), edited by Shengxian
Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
She Ren. 1943. “Shanghai wenhuajie zong jiantao” (A general examination of Shanghai’s
culture). Shanhai (Shanghai) (February).
Shen bao (Shanghai newspaper). Published 1872–1949. Shanghai.
Shen Yixing, Jiang Peinan, and Zheng Qingsheng, eds. 1996. Shanghai gongren yundong shi
(History of the labor movement in Shanghai), vol. 2. Shenyang: Liaoning renmin
chubanshe. 
Shengxian Yueju Shaoxingxi kao (Shengxian Shaoxing Yue opera scripts). 1930s. Shanghai:
Yimin shuju.
Shengxian zhi (A Shengxian gazetteer). 1989. Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin chubanshe.
Shengxianxi jijing(Collection of lyrics from Shengxian operas). 1996. Edited by Qiu Yawei,
Zhang Jishun, and Qiu Wenguang. With 17 audiocassettes. In Shengxun, series no. 2.
Taipei: Shengxun zazhi she. 
Shengxun (Shengxian affairs). 1987–99. Edited by Qiu Yawei. Taipei: Taipei shi Sheng-
xian Tongxianghui (Shengxian Native-Place Association in Taipei). 
Shi Jiaoru, ed. 1939. Shaoxing xikao quance(A complete collection of Shaoxing opera lyrics).
Shanghai: Yuesheng chuban she.
Shijie chenbao (World morning news). 1940s. Shanghai.
Shishi xinbao (The new current affairs). 1940s. Shanghai.
Shuoxi lunyi: Shanghai Yueju Yuan jianyuan sanshi zhounian wutai yishu wenxuan(Discussing the
arts of the theater: Selected essays on the art of the stage on the thirtieth anniver-
sary of the founding of the Shanghai Yue Opera House). 1985. Compiled by Shang-
hai Yueju Yuan. Shanghai.
Stock, Jonathan P. J. 1997 . “Huju and Musical Change: The Rise of a Local Operatic Form
in East China, to 1920.” ACMR Reports: Journal of the Association for Chinese Music Research
[Pittsburgh], vol. 10, no. 1 (Spring).
Su Qing. 1944a. Huanjin ji(A collection of essays from Huanjin). Shanghai: Tiandi chuban-
she. Reprint, Hong Kong: Lili chubanshe, 1946.
———. 1944b. Jiehun shinian (Ten years of my married life). Shanghai: Tiandi chuban-
she. Reprint, Shanghai: The Su Qing Publisher, 1945.
———. 1947 . Xu “Jiehun shinian” (Sequel to Ten years of my married life ). Hong Kong: Lili
chubanshe. 
———. 1995. Su Qing sanwen jingbian (A selection of Su Qing’s best essays). Compiled
by Yi Qing, Yi Xin, and Xiao Lan. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chubanshe.
322 References

=== PDF PAGE 344 ===

Sun Chongtao and Xu Hongtu. 1995. Xiqu youling shi(History of opera performers). Bei-
jing: Beijing wenhua yishu chubanshe.
Suqu (Collections of popular opera scripts). Preserved in the Fu Ssu-nien Library, at the
Institute of History & Philology, Academia Sinica, Taipei.
Tanaka Issei. 1985. “The Social and Historical Context of Ming-Ch’ing Local Drama.”
In David Johnson, Andrew J. Nathan, and Evelyn Rawski, eds., Popular Culture in Late
Imperial China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tang Zhenchang, ed. Shanghai shi (History of Shanghai). 1989. Shanghai: Shanghai ren-
min chubanshe.
Tao Juyin. 1979. Gudao jianwen—Kangzhan shiqi de Shanghai(The things I witnessed in “island”
Shanghai). Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe.
Tao Lanying. 1943. “Xianhua xiaojie zuojia” (Chat about the young lady writers). Chun-
qiu (Spring and autumn), vol. 8 (May 15).
Tiandi (Heaven and Earth). 1942–45. Edited by Feng Heyi (Su Qing). Shanghai: Tiandi
chubanshe.
Wakeman, Frederic, Jr. 1995. Policing Shanghai, 1927–1937. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press. 
Wang Changnian. 1947 . Da Shanghai zhinan, 1947(Tourist guide for the great Shanghai,
1947). Shanghai: Dongnan wenhua fuwushe.
Wang Dewei. 1988. Zhong sheng xuan hua: San ling yu ba ling nian dai di Zhongguo xiao shuo(Clam-
oring: Chinese ﬁction in the 1930s and 1980s). Taipei: Yuan liu chu ban gong si. 
Wang Lin, ed. 1991. Pingxi zai Tianjin fazhan jianshi (A brief history of the development
of ping opera in Tianjin). Tianjin: Tianjin renmin chubanshe.
Wang, Qingping. 1998. The Commercial Production of the Early Qing Scholar-Beauty Romances.
Ph.D. diss., Stanford University.
Wang Xiaochuan, ed. 1958. Yuan Ming Qing sandai jinhui xiaoshuo xiqu shiliao (Historical
records of banning and destroying works of ﬁction and opera scripts in the Yuan,
Ming, and Qing dynasties). Beijing: Zuojia chubanshe.
Wang, Zheng. 1999. Women in the Chinese Enlightenment: Oral and Textual Histories. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
———. 2001. “Call Me ‘Qingnian’ But Not ‘Funü’: A Maoist Youth in Retrospect.” In
Zhong Xueping, Wang Zheng, and Bai Di, eds., Some of Us: Chinese Women Growing Up
in the Mao Era, 27–52. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Ward, Barbara E. 1985. “Regional Operas and Their Audiences: Evidence from Hong
Kong.” In David Johnson, Andrew Nathan, and Evelyn Rawski, eds., Popular Culture
in Late Imperial China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wei Shaochang. 1962. Yuanyang hudie pai yanjiu ziliao(Materials for research in the butter -
ﬂy school), vol. 1. Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
———. 1982. “Yueju manhua” (Informal talks about Yue opera). Xiwen, vol. 3 (June).
Hangzhou.
———. 1984. Yuanyang hudie pai yanjiu ziliao (Materials for research on the butterﬂy school),
vol. 2. Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
References    323

=== PDF PAGE 345 ===

———. 1989. “Yueju zai Shanghai de xingqi he yanbian” (The rise and development of
Yue opera in Shanghai). In Xiqu jingying (The best of Chinese operas), vol. 2. Shang-
hai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe.
———. 1990. Wo kan yuanyan hudie pai (My view of the “mandarin ducks and butterﬂies”
school). Hong Kong: Zhonghua shuju.
———. 1995. Lishi de jianzheng—Yao Shuijuan dancheng bashi zhounian jinian (Witness to
 history—A memorial collection of photos for the eightieth anniversary of Yao Shui-
juan’s birthday). Shanghai. 
Wenhui bao (Wenhui daily). 1940s. Shanghai. 
Wolf, Margery. 1975. “Women and Suicide in China.” In Margery Wolf and Roxane Witke,
eds., Women in Chinese Society. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Wu Fuhui. 1995. Dushi xuanwo zhongde Haipai xiaoshuo(Shanghai-style ﬁction in the urban
eddies). Changsha: Hunan jiaoyu chubanshe.
Wutai jiemei (Stage sisters). 1999. A Yue opera playbill by Shanghai Yue Opera House.
“Wutai jiemei”: Cong tigang dao yingpian (Stage sisters: From outline to ﬁlm). 1982. Shanghai:
Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Xiang hudie (Fragrant butterﬂies). Mid-1940s. In Shaoxing wenxi nüzi changzuo diduban
(Women’s didu opera, Shaoxing civil opera). 31 volumes. Shanghai: Yimin shuju. 
Xiang Zhen. 1992. “Du pai banzhang Qiu Guangxian” (The serious troupe owner Qiu
Guangxian). In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera), edited by Shengxian
Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
Xianglin sao (Sister Xianglin). 1949. Comic book. Shanghai: Jiaoyu chubanshe.
Xianglin sao (Sister Xianglin). 1978. Yue opera script. Original story by Lu Xun. Adapted
by Wu Sheng, Zhuang Zhi, Yuan Xuefen, and Zhang Guifeng. Shanghai: Shanghai
wenyi chubanshe.
Xiao Yueying. 1983. “Yueju gaige gei wo de yishu yingxiang” (The inﬂuence of the Yue
opera reform on my performing art). In Yishu yanjiu ziliao(Sources for research in art),
vol. 6. Hangzhou: Zhejiang yishu yanjiu suo.
Xin Yu si (New Threads). http://www.xys.org. Chinese-language Web site for the U.S.-
based monthly online journal. Started Feburary 1994.
Xinmin bao (The new citizen daily). 1940s. Shanghai.
Xinmin wanbao (The new citizen evening news) [sometimes Xinmin bao wankan]. 1940s.
Shanghai.
Xinwen bao (Daily news). Published 1893–1949. Shanghai. 
Xiqu jingying (The best of Chinese operas). 1989. 2 volumes. Published as special issues
of Shanghai wenshi ziliao xuanji (Selections from materials in the culture and history of
Shanghai), nos. 61 and 62. Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe.
Xu Chengbei. 1990. Mei Lanfang yu ershi shiji (Mei Lanfang and the twentieth century).
Beijing: Sanlian shudian, 1994.
Xu Dafeng. 1939. “Shanghai de xin yinxiang” (New impressions of Shanghai). Shanghai
shenghuo, year 3, no. 10 (October 17).
Xu Gongsu and Qiu Jinzhang. 1933. Shanghai gonggong zujie zhidu(The structure of the inter-
324 References

=== PDF PAGE 346 ===

national settlement of Shanghai). In Shanghai gonggong zujie shigao(History of the inter-
national settlement in Shanghai). 1980. Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe, 1984.
Xu Hansheng, ed. 1935. Shang Xiaoyun zhuanji (A special issue dedicated to Shang
Xiaoyun). Beiping: Jingjin yinshuju. 
Xu Jin. 1947 . “Xue bu” (Learning to walk). Yueju shijie(The Yue opera world), no. 1 (Sep-
tember 1). Shanghai: Yinhua chubanshe.
———. 1962. “Cong xiaoshuo dao xi—Tan Yueju Honglou meng de gaibian” (From novel
to opera play—About the adaptation of Dream of the red chamber). In Shuoxi lunyi: Shang-
hai Yueju Yuan jianyuan sanshi zhounian wutai yishu wenxuan(Discussing the arts of the the-
ater: Selected essays on the art of the stage on the thirtieth anniversary of the founding
of the Shanghai Yue Opera House), compiled by Shanghai Yueju Yuan. Shanghai,
1985.
———. 1994. “Qiantan Yueju yishu de gexing tese” (The characteristics of the art of
Yue opera). In Gao Yilong and Lu Shijun, eds., Chongxin zouxiang huihuang: Yueju gaige
wushi zhounian lunwen ji(Resume the past glory: A collection of essays dedicated to the
ﬁfth anniversary of Yue opera reform). Beijing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
Xu Yulan. 1985. “Wo yan Jia Baoyu” (I perform Jia Baoyu). In Shuoxi lunyi: Shanghai Yueju
Yuan jianyuan sanshi zhounian wutai yishu wenxuan (Discussing the arts of the theater:
Selected essays on the art of the stage on the thirtieth anniversary of the founding
of the Shanghai Yue Opera House), compiled by Shanghai Yueju Yuan. Shanghai.
Xuesheng jinian kan(Commemorative publication of Xuesheng Company). May 1946. Shang-
hai: Xuesheng juwu bu.
Yamagami Kanao. 1937 . Sekko zaibatsu no kisoteki k¯osatsu (A study of the foundation of
Zhejiang ﬁnancial magnates). Shanhai Mantetsu kikan (The Shanghai Southern
Manchuria Railway quarterly), vols. 1 and 2. Minami Manshu ¯ Tetsudo¯ Kabushiki
Gaisha Shanhai Jimusho (Shanghai ofﬁce of the Southern Manchuria Railway Com-
pany). Shanghai.
Yang Dongping. 1994. Chengshi jifeng: Beijing he Shanghai de wenhua jingshen(Wind of the sea-
sons: The cultural spirits of Beijing and Shanghai). Beijing: Dongfang chubanshe.
Yang Hansheng. 1945. “Zhongguo xiju zhong de xin jiu nüxing” (Old and new women’s
images in Chinese theater). Xiandai funü (Modern women), vol. 6, no. 3 (Shanghai
edition, no. 1, October): 15–18.
Yang Yi. 1993. Ershi shiji Zhongguo xiaoshuo yu wenhua (Chinese ﬁction and culture in the
twentieth century). Taipei: Yeqiang chubanshe.
Yao Shuijuan zhuanji(A special issue dedicated to Yao Shuijuan). 1939. Compiled by Juan-
she (The Juan Association). Shanghai: Yao Shuijuan zhuanji chubanshe.
Yeh, Catherine. 2006. Shanghai Love: Courtesans, Intellectuals, and Entertainment Culture, 1850–
1910. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Yeh, Wen-hsin. 1992. “Progressive Journalism and Shanghai’s Petty Urbanites: Zou Taofen
and the Shenghuo Weekly, 1926–1945.” In Frederic Wakeman, Jr., and Wen-hsin Yeh,
eds., Shanghai Sojourners. Berkeley: Institute of East Asian Studies, University of Cali-
fornia: Center for Chinese Studies.
References    325

=== PDF PAGE 347 ===

———. 1995. “Corporate Space, Communal Time: Shanghai’s China Bank.” American His-
torical Review, vol. 100, no. 1 (February).
Yi Bing. 1959. “Ping Yueju Honglou meng” (On the Yue opera Dream of the red chamber ). In
Shuoxi lunyi: Shanghai Yueju Yuan jianyuan sanshi zhounian wutai yishu wenxuan(Discussing
the arts of the theater: Selected essays on the art of the stage on the thirtieth anniver-
sary of the founding of the Shanghai Yue Opera House), compiled by Shanghai Yueju
Yuan. Shanghai, 1985.
Yin Guifang. 1951. “Cong Jia Baoyu zhege renwu jiangqi” (Speaking about the charac-
ter Jia Baoyu). Edited by Li Huikang. In Li Huikang, ed., Yidai fengliu Yin Guifang(The
great actress Yin Guifang), 394–95. Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe, 1995.
———. 1982. “Wo zouguo de yishu daolu” (My career as an artist). In Yueju yishujia huiyi
lu (Memoirs by Yue opera artists), 8–18, edited by the editorial division, Wenhua yule
(Culture and entertainment). Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin chubanshe.
Ying Zhiliang. 2003. Zhongguo Yueju fazhan shi (History of Yue opera in China). Beijing:
Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
Yishu yanjiu ziliao (Sources for research in art), vol. 6. 1983. Hangzhou: Zhejiang yishu
yanjiu suo.
Yu Shangyuan (Yui Shang-Yuen), ed. 1927 . Guoju yundong(National theater movement).
Zhongguo Xijushe congshu. Shanghai: Xinyue shudian.
Yuan Xuefen. 1978. “Chong yan Xianglin sao ” (Restaging Sister Xianglin). In Xianglin sao
(Sister Xianglin). Yue opera script. Original story by Lu Xun. Adapted by Wu Sheng,
Zhuang Zhi, Yuan Xuefen, and Zhang Guifeng. Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
———. 1983. “Ganku deshi cunxin zhi—Yueju gaige sishi nian de huigu he renshi” (Rec-
ollections and understanding of Yue opera reform in the past forty years). In Yishu
yanjiu ziliao (Sources for research in art), vol. 6. Hangzhou: Zhejiang yishu yanjiu suo.
———. 1994. “Qianghua jingpin yishi, tuijin Yueju gaige” (Think more on producing
masterpieces, push forward Yue opera reform). In Gao Yilong and Lu Shijun, eds.,
Chongxin zouxiang huihuang: Yueju gaige wushi zhounian lunwen ji (Resume the past glory:
A collection of essays dedicated to the ﬁfth anniversary of Yue opera reform). Bei-
jing: Zhongguo xiju chubanshe.
———. 2002. Yuan Xuefen zishu: Qiusuo rensheng yishu de zhendi (Yuan Xuefen’s own story:
The search for the true meaning of art and life). Shanghai: Cishu chubanshe.
Yue Jia. 1992. “Yueju Meng Lijun bianyan shimo” (How the Yue opera Meng Lijunwas pro-
duced). In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera), edited by Shengxian
Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
Yue ou (The song of Yue). 1939. Shanghai.
Yue yuan shen yun (Beautiful displays of Yue opera). 2001. Edited by Chen Shenglai, Hu
Jinjun, and Liu Wenguo. Shanghai: Shanghai shuhua chuban she.
Yueju baimei tu (Photographs of the one hundred Yue opera actresses). December 1947 .
Shanghai: Yuelian chubanshe.
Yueju bao (Yue opera news). 1946–49. Shanghai. 
Yueju huabao (Yue opera pictorial). 1940–41. Shanghai. 
326 References

=== PDF PAGE 348 ===

Yueju lingxiou xikao (Lyrics by the leading Yue opera actresses). 1940s. Shanghai: Yuelian
chubanshe.
Yueju ribao (Yue opera daily). 1940s. Shanghai. 
Yueju shijie (The Yue opera world). 1941. Shanghai. 
Yueju shijie(The Yue opera world). Started September 1947 . Shanghai: Yinhua chubanshe.
Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera). 1992. Edited by Shengxian Zhengxie Wen-
shi Ziliao Weiyuanhui. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she.
Yueju xikao daquan (The complete Yue opera scripts). 1940s. Shanghai: Daming shuju.
Yueju yishu jia huiyi lu (Memoirs by Yue opera artists). 1982. Edited by the editorial divi-
sion, Wenhua yule (Culture and entertainment). Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin chuban-
she, 1984.
Yueju zhuankan(A special publication for Yue opera). April 1940. Shanghai: Sanyou Shiye
She.
Zaoqi Yueju fazhan shi(A history of the early development of Yue opera). 1983. Compiled
by Shengxian Wenhuaju Yueju fazhan shi bianxie zu. Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin
chubanshe.
Zazhi (The miscellany). 1938–45. Shanghai.
Zeng Yongyi. 1976. “Nanban nüzhuang yu nüban nanzhuang (Men playing women and
vice versa). In Shuo xiqu (Talk about opera). Taipei: Lianjing shudian, 1983.
———. 1988. Taiwan gezaixi de fazhan yu bianqian (The development of boy-singers’ opera
in Taiwan). Taipei: Lianjing shudian.
Zhang Ailing (Eileen Chang). 1943. “Daodi shi Shanghai ren” (Alas, Shanghainese). Zazhi
(The miscellany), vol. 11, no. 4 (August). Shanghai. The essay was later published in
Zhang Ailing, Liuyan (Gossip), 1945. 
———. 1945. Liuyan (Gossip). Reprint, Taipei: Huangguan chubanshe, 1968, 1995.
———. 1992. Zhang Ailing sanwen quanbian (The complete collection of Zhang Ailing’s
essays). Compiled by Lai Fengyi. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chubanshe.
———. 2006. Zhang Ailing ji: Yujinxiang (A collection of Zhang Ailing’s novellas: Tulip).
Beijing: Beijing chubanshe chuban jituan and Beijing shiyue wenyi chubanshe.
Zhang Dai. 1597–1679. Taoan mengyi (Dream recollections from the Clay Studio).
Reprinted in Taoan mengyi, Xihu mengxun (Dream recollections from the Clay Studio,
Back on West Lake in dreams). Beijing: Zuojia chubanshe, 1995. 
Zhang Faying. 2002. Zhongguo jiayue xiban (Private opera troupes in China). Beijing:
Xueyuan chubanshe.
Zhang Gansheng. 1991. Minguo tongsu xiaoshuo lungao (On popular ﬁctions in the Repub-
lican period). Chongqing: Chongqing chubanshe.
Zhang Guifeng. “Yi qingnian shiqi de yanxi shenghuo” (Recollections of the career life
in my youth). 1982. In Yueju yishu jia huiyi lu(Memoirs by Yue opera artists), edited by
the editorial division, Wenhua yule(Culture and entertainment). Hangzhou: Zhejiang
renmin chubanshe, 1982, 1984.
Zhang Henshui. 1935. Ping-Hu tongche (Shanghai express). Shanghai: Baixin shudian.
Zhang Jishun, comp. 1992a. Yueju chuantong shuochang: Luodi changshu (Traditional story-
References    327

=== PDF PAGE 349 ===

telling and singing in the early period of Yue opera). Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi
chubanshe. 
———. 1992b. “Yueju de bangui xisu” (The rituals and customs of Yue opera troupes).
In Yueju suyuan (Tracing the origins of Yue opera), 97–104, edited by Shengxian
Zhengxie Wenshi Ziliao Weiyuanhui. Hangzhou: Zhejiang wenyi chuban she. 
Zhang Lihui. 1983. “Shanghai yishu yanjiusuo suozhang Zhang Lihui tongzhi de kaimuci”
(Opening speech by Zhang Lihui, head of the Shanghai Institute for Research in Arts).
In Yishu yanjiu ziliao (Sources for research in art), vol. 6. Hangzhou: Zhejiang yishu
yanjiu suo.
Zhang Lihui and Gao Yilong. 1984. Yuan Xuefen de yishu daolu (The artistic path of Yuan
Xuefen). Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi chubanshe.
Zhang Linghui. 1977 . “Mantan Yueju” (Chat about Yue opera). Zhejiang yuekan (Zhejiang
monthly), vol. 89 (June). Taipei: Taiwan Zhejiang Native-Place Organization.
Zhang Qi. 1984. “Qian yan” (Preface). In Zhu Bangxing, Hu Lin’ge, and Xu Sheng, Shang-
hai chanye yu Shanghai zhigong (Shanghai’s industries and workers). 1939. Edited by
Shanghai gongren Yundong Shiliao Weiyuanhui (Committee on Historical Materi-
als of the Shanghai Labor Movement). Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe.
Zhang, Yingjin. 1996. The City in Modern Chinese Literature and Film: Conﬁgurations of Space,
Time, and Gender. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Zhang Zijing. 1996. Wode jiejie Zhang Ailing(My older sister, Zhang Ailing). Taipei: Shih
bao wenhua chuban gongsi.
Zhao Xiaosi. 1994. Xu Yulan zhuan (Biography of Xu Yulan). Shanghai: Shanghai wenyi
chubanshe, 1995.
Zhejiang sheng nongcun diaocha(Survey of the rural area of Zhejiang). 1934. Shanghai: Com-
mercial Press.
Zhejiang yuekan (Zhejiang monthly). 1970s–1990s. Taipei: Taiwan Zhejiang Native-Place
Organization.
Zheng Yimei. 1987 . “Guanyu Libai liuzhoukan—Dai xu” (About the Saturday weekly—
Preface for the reprint of the magazine). In the reprint of Libai liu (Saturday), origi-
nally published in Shanghai, 1914–23. Nanjing: Jiangsu Guangling guji keyinshe.
Zhongguo xiqu juzhong da cidian(Dictionary of Chinese opera genres). 1995. Shanghai: Shang-
hai cishu chubanshe.
Zhongguo xiqu quyi cidian(Dictionary of Chinese opera and storytelling). 1981. Shanghai:
Shanghai cishu chubanshe.
Zhongguo Yueju (Yue opera in China). 1989. Edited by Qian Facheng. Hangzhou: Zhe-
jiang renmin chubanshe.
Zhongyang ribao: Shanghai ban (Central daily: Shanghai edition).
Zhou bao (Weekly). 1946. Edited by Tang Tao and Ke Ling. Shanghai.
Zhou Baocai. 1983. “Huigu wo jingli de Yueju yinyue gaige” (My experience with Yue
opera music reform). In Yishu yanjiu ziliao (Sources for research in art), vol. 6. Hang -
zhou: Zhejiang yishu yanjiu suo.
Zhou Baokui. 1990. “Wode Yueju laodan shengya” (My career as an actress specializ-
328 References

=== PDF PAGE 350 ===

ing in old female roles). Wenhua yule (Culture and entertainment magazine), no. 6
(June). 
Zhou Huiling. 1996. “Nü yanyuan, xieshi zhuyi, ‘xin nüxing’ lunshu—Wan Qing dao
wusi shiqi Zhongguo xiandai juchang zhong de xingbie biaoyan” (Actresses, realism,
and the discourse of ‘new women’—Gender performance in modern Chinese theaters
from the late Qing to the May Fourth period). Research on Women in Modern Chinese His-
tory, vol. 4 (June). Edited and published by the Institute of Modern History, Acade-
mia Sinica, Taipei.
Zhu Bangxing, Hu Lin’ge, and Xu Sheng. 1939. Shanghai chanye yu Shanghai zhigong(Shang-
hai’s industries and workers). Hong Kong: Yuandong chubanshe. New edition, edited
by Shanghai Gongren Yundong Shiliao Weiyuanhui (Committee on Historical Mate-
rials of the Shanghai Labor Movement). Shanghai: Shanghai renmin chubanshe, 1984.
Zong Fei. 1940. “Luanlun xing yu ouran xing” (Incest and contingency). Xiju yu wenxue
(Drama and literature), vol. 1, no. 4 (June).
References    329

=== PDF PAGE 351 ===

Index
Illustrations are indicated in italic type.
330
actor-centered system, 90, 150, 230
actresses: deaths of, 60–61; dilemma 
of, 62–69; as new women, 62; under
public’s voyeuristic gaze, 62–64, 65; 
in reformist ideology, 62, 64–65, 66–
68; transformed in public sphere, 171–
72. See also female entertainers; female
performers; Yue opera actresses
adoptive mothers, 121, 123, 166; system
of, 125–32, 265, 292n67, 292n68; Zhou
Enlai’s comments on, 182
aesthetics: authentic Chinese, 36; femi-
nine, 25, 215, 216–19, 221–23, 231,
233, 249, 256, 265; of love drama, 14,
16, 18; masculine, 231; modern urban,
4, 261, 278n46; Western, 87 . See also
Yue opera aesthetics
agency, 190, 191, 194, 255
all-female cast, 52, 100, 101, 231, 232
Baidai Recording Company, 136
beggar’s opera (taofan xi), 30
beggar’s stories (taofan shu), 39
Beijing opera, 7–9, 13, 38, 46, 263, 276n9,
281n13; all-girls troupes of, 56, 283n75,
284n83; compared to Yue opera, xii,
xiii, 3, 18, 19, 148, 188, 267; erotic
plays in, 184, 186; female audiences
and actresses of, 33–35, 52–53, 56;
intel lectual-led reform in, 65, 69,
285n9, 285n15; male actors of, 69–70,
107, 123, 127–28, 129, 150, 158, 160,
161, 173, 174, 183, 241(see also “four
great female impersonators” and specific
actors); and male-centered culture, 27–
30, 254, 256; Mulan in, 93; patrons 
and audiences of, 36, 86, 88, 89, 107,
108, 111, 117, 118, 122–23; in PRC
politics, 193, 196; and radio, 133,
293n87, 293n93; Shanghai Beijing
Opera House, 183, 194, 267, 297n21;
Shanghai-style in, 12, 77, 216, 300n2;
style and content of, 38, 77–80, 92,
100, 193, 216, 217–22, 231, 239, 241–
42, 300n12; waning popularity of, 36,
38, 57, 114, 200, 281n29
bitter plays (kuxi), 238–39
boy-singers’ opera (gezaixi), 3, 30, 231,
239, 281n13, 281n15
Break Open the Coffin (Da piguan), 184
Butler, Judith, 255–56
Butterfly Dream (Hudie meng), 213, 254,
262
Butterfly Lovers (Liang Shanbo yu Zhu
Yingtai): as best-seller record, 219; 
as drama within the drama (xi zhong xi)

=== PDF PAGE 352 ===

in Stage Sisters, 203–5; early career in
Shanghai, 47, 48–51, 101; erotic ele-
ments in, 73, 76, 286n29; and fans,
228; film of, 105, 138, 174, 188, 217,
222, 282n58; transformed in Yue opera
reform, 89, 100, 102–5; as Yue opera
masterpiece, xiv, 3, 99, 185, 250. See
also Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai; T ragic
Story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai
Cai Chusheng, 14, 66, 67
CCP undergrounds, 143–50, 145, 160,
173–74, 178–80, 193, 197, 210, 257
chai scale system (chai diao), 218, 219,
300n8
chang tanghui (performing at private
homes and parties), 191
charity performances, 126–27
Chen Shulian, 88, 120–21, 131, 269
Cheng Liping, 232, 250, 269
Cheng Rong: comments on Yue opera
aesthetics, 221; as first female Yue
opera script writer and staff member 
of Xuesheng Company, 87, 89, 120,
154, 157; testimony to the audience
change, 110–11, 131; testimony to the
rising status of Yue opera, 188, 222 
Cheng Yanqiu, 33, 35, 128, 173, 174, 220
chuanqi, 12, 15, 16, 27, 29, 235
cinema, 13, 18, 125, 137, 190, 278n45
citizenry building, 260–62
Civil War (1945–49), 10, 19, 140, 142,
175
clappers (bangzi), 28, 30, 38, 42, 183,
281n13
collectivelly owned troupes, 184
communist revolution: assessed, 198,
256–58; as melodrama, 176, 179, 190,
193, 195, 210, 297n3; during PRC
period, xi, 25, 175; and Stage Sisters,
176, 179, 189, 194; and ten model
operas, 196; Yuan Xuefen and, 192
cross-dressing performance, 100
cross-gender acting, 52, 53, 100, 103,
138, 283n71
crude eroticism, 75–77, 96–97
crying tone (kuku diao), 239
cultural modernity, 4, 5, 32, 260
culture of love, 4, 6, 215, 216, 250, 
302n5
Daily News (Xinwen bao), 13, 141, 142,
147, 148, 155
Dalai Theater, 60, 72, 73, 74, 84, 89,
110, 134
Deng Xiaoping, 195, 198, 199
desire: love and, xi, xiv, 31, 50, 77, 78,
83, 92, 96, 242; sexual and erotic, 72,
80, 96, 97, 98, 123, 124, 235, 236; 
for status, 67, 101, 122, 130, 157, 164,
176, 191, 212
didu opera, 37, 38, 77, 78, 80, 109, 148,
284n87 . See also Shengxian opera
Ding Jingtang (pseudonym Ding Ying),
143–46, 270, 294n10, 294n13
Ding Ling, 233
Ding Ying. See Ding Jingtang
director-centered system, 261
division within the CCP, 195
Doll’s House, A, 17
Dong Qian, 122
Dongshan Company, 105, 155
drama within the drama (xi zhong xi),
203–5, 209
Dream of the Red Chamber (Honglou meng,
Yue opera play), 291n64, 301n64; as
best-seller record, 219; feminine rein-
vention of, 240–50; the film, 194, 197,
217, 222, 249; as love tragedy, 102; as
most popular Yue opera play, 201; the
novel, 34, 215–16, 240–42; Shanghai
Grand Theater version of, 263; Shang-
hai Yue Opera House version of, 228,
230, 245; WangWenjuan as Lin Daiyu,
230; Xu Yulan as Jia Baoyu, 228; Yin
Guifang as Jia Baoyu, 224; as Yue opera
masterpiece, xiv, 3, 99, 102, 188, 222,
250, 261
economics of viewing opera, 116–20
elite bias: against popular genres, x–xi;
against women’s opera, xi, xiv
Emerald Hairpin (Biyu zan), 47–48, 96,
101, 138, 217, 279n47
Index    331

=== PDF PAGE 353 ===

emotions, xi, xiii, xiv, 6, 16, 208, 216,
218, 219, 244, 250, 254
engineers of the soul (linghun gongcheng-
shi), 257
entertainment hall, 107–9, 114, 116, 117,
118, 148
erotic plays, 92, 96–98, 99, 148, 184–85,
92, 96, 98, 148, 184, 185, 186, 288n71
eroticism, 28, 62, 64, 73, 75–78, 92, 96–
99, 102, 236. See also public culture of
erotica
fan clubs, 121, 122
Fan Ruijuan: and fans, 122, 217, 227; as
immigrant actress, 211; joining Shang-
hai Yue Opera House, 183; as Liang
Shanbo, 102, 104, 104–5; as office
worker in Happy Family Reunion, 229; 
as one of the ten sisters in fund-raising
performance, 157, 158; and Yue opera
reform, 85, 91
Fang Yafen, 187, 211, 213
Fanghua Company: audience reactions 
to Baoyu and Daiyu, 228, 242; Fang
Xuewen rejoining the company,
299n78; relocation to Fuzhou, 183;
Tale of the Western Chamber, 298n31; Yin
Guifang founded, 223–24
Fate in Tears and Laughter (Tixiao yinyuan),
13, 71
female audiences: entrance into cultural
market, 33–36, 38–39; reasons to go
to theater, 115–16. See also Yue opera
audiences; Yue opera fans
female entertainers, 25, 62–68, 71, 88,
175, 253, 266. See also actresses; female
performers
female images, 6, 68, 97, 144, 219–21
female impersonators in Beijing opera:
compared with young male imperson-
ators in Yue opera, 231; compared to
Yue opera in creating female images,
220; as model for Yue opera actresses,
128; during Qing dynasty, 48; rise
during Republican period, 53–56; and
transvestite play, 100. See also four great
female impersonators
female migrants, 37 
female performers, 3, 28, 32–33, 35, 38,
52–54, 62–63, 73, 81, 281n26. See also
actresses; female entertainers
female Shengxian opera troupes, 26, 
38, 51–53, 57–58, 77–78, 108–9, 253.
See also girls’ Shengxian opera schools
(nüban)
feminine aesthetics. See Yue opera 
aesthetics
feminine opera, 27, 80, 223, 230, 250,
254; culture of, 3, 251
feminine value, 253–56
feminization: of Dream of the Red Chamber,
249; of female roles, 232; as general
trend of popular entertainment, 5, 6,
32, 36, 53; of male roles, 232; of opera
content and style, 216; of opera cul-
ture, 26; of operatic body, 251
folk operas, 26, 30, 281n13. See also minor
operas
For the Love of the Country (Shanhe lian),
157, 159, 222
foreign settlements in Shanghai, 10, 12,
28, 38, 52, 123, 276n11, 278n37,
280n5
“four famous men in Shanghai” (Haishang
sida wenren), 113
“four great female impersonators” (sida
mingdan in Beijing opera), 33–35, 36,
220, 231. 
See also Beijing opera, male
actors of; female impersonators in 
Beijing opera
free love, 51, 53, 185, 239, 240; and mar-
riage, 16, 32, 38, 47, 102, 203, 239, 251
Fu Quanxiang: as admirer of Hollywood
films, 286n36; and first Yue opera
radio show, 134; in Gold and Beauty, 82,
83; as one of ten sisters in fund-raising
performances, 157, 158, 161, 296n48;
to play courtesan roles, 237; relation-
ship to the film Stage Sisters, 179, 190;
with Shanghai Yue Opera House, 183,
211; in union incident, 151–55; in Xiao
Dangui incident, 169–70; as Zhu
Yingtai, 217 
Fuller, Peter, xiii
332 Index

=== PDF PAGE 354 ===

Gao Jin, 129, 271, 292n79
gender boundaries: transgressing, 123–24
gender relations, 4, 5, 10, 16, 17, 22, 25,
99, 250, 288n74
gender-straight theaters (nan nü heyan),
26, 52–53, 82,  203; in Yue opera, 
231–33 ( see also Siming Mountain Yue
opera)
gender system, 22, 53, 61, 63, 219 
Generals of the Yang Family (Yangjia jiang),
29
girls’ Beijing opera (mao’erxi), 51, 52, 57,
58, 73, 163, 238
girls’ Shengxian opera schools (nüban):
first school of, 53–57; flourishing, 57–
59; impact of Great Depression on, 57
globalized mass culture/entertainment,
199, 200, 257
Goddess (Shen nü), 64, 66, 248
Grand Golden Theater, 69, 158
Great Depression, 57
Great World (Da Shijie), 107–8, 117,
118, 148
Guotai Theater, 165, 169
Haipai (Shanghai style): Beijing opera,
12, 77, 148; courtship, 17; literature, 
4, 13, 277n24
Hall, Stuart, xv
Han Yi (Hong Jun), 86–87, 89, 110–11,
157, 198, 210, 270
Hang-Jia-Hu area, 40, 46, 57, 138
Hollywood film, 20, 80, 81, 127, 166,
286n36
homosexual relations, 125, 130, 205–8,
244, 285n6. See also same-sex relations
Hong Shen, 16, 53, 65, 137, 139, 152,
288n64
Huai opera (Huaiju), 9, 12, 18, 68, 111,
113, 194, 200, 261, 297n21
Huang Jinrong, 113, 123, 166
Huangmei opera (Huangmeixi), 49
improvisation, 8, 90, 209, 218, 231, 261,
262
improvised performance (lutou xi), 90,
204, 230
institutionalization, 260–61
intellectual discourse, 140, 255, 280n1
internet, 263–64, 302n4
“island” (gudao) Shanghai: CCP activities
in, 144–48; Japanese actions in, 19–
22; popular-culture boom in, 22, 58;
population change in, 278n37; spoken
drama in, 84, 86, 279n46, 287n50; 
Yue opera play Hua Mulan in, 92–94;
Yue opera’s rise in, 113. See also wartime
Shanghai
Jia Guilian, 189
Jiangnan area, 11, 28, 53
Jin Qibing, 39
Kim Il-Sung, 185
Kun opera, 18, 19, 28, 38, 91, 92, 200,
233, 241, 287n60
leftist filmmakers, 14
leftist films, 4, 17, 195
Leng Shan (Jin Zhaoyuan), 166, 167, 168,
170, 236
Li Huikang, 223
Li Jiang, 217, 222, 232, 269, 276n10
Li Taicheng, 182, 184, 193, 199, 270
Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai(Liang Shanbo
yu Zhu Yingtai), xiv, 47, 48, 49, 102,
104, 282n58, 283n65. See also Butterfly
Lovers; T ragic Story of Liang Shanbo and
Zhu Yingtai
little opera (xiaogeban). See Shengxian 
little opera
Liu Shaoqi, 195
local dialects, 7, 8, 9, 18, 30, 111, 275n5
local operas, 7–9
Lu Gendi, 60, 72, 84, 179, 180
Lun Xun: New Year’s Sacrifice and Yue
opera Sister Xianglin, 139–40, 143–48,
178, 181, 191, 197, 295n23; on Ruan
Lingy
u, 67, 72, 171; works and com-
ments, 17, 88, 223
Ma Chaoshui, 39, 40, 41, 45, 47–48, 77
Ma Zhanghua, 60, 64, 71, 72, 73–75,
129, 134, 170, 172, 179–80, 279n47
Index    333

=== PDF PAGE 355 ===

Madame Chiang Kai-shek (Song Mei -
ling), 192
main melody productions, 199, 201, 243
major opera (daxi): decline of, 35–36;
female imagery in, 218–20; formation
as male-dominant culture, 27–30; 
studies of, 281n29; style of, 77–78, 
81, 92, 218, 219, 241, 300n12. See also
Beijing opera: and male-centered 
opera 
major storytelling, 40, 41
male Shengxian opera, 26, 51–52, 54, 
59, 77–78, 78, 108, 123, 124, 127, 161,
232
male Yue opera. See male Shengxian opera
mandarin ducks and butterflies school 
of fiction, xi, 4, 11, 15, 23, 275n1,
277n20, 278–79n46
Mao Zedong, 142, 153, 173, 198, 241;
on culture, 181, 193–94, 181, 195–96,
241, 250; Maoist ideas, 195, 199, 254;
in post-Mao years, 175, 199
mass audience, 36–37, 99, 137
mass media, 8, 9, 25, 64, 66, 132, 133,
142, 161, 259, 262
May Fourth New Culture, 26, 32, 38,
101, 251
Mei Lanfang, 20, 33–34, 69, 93, 124,
128, 129, 160, 173, 174, 183, 220, 
223, 241, 276n9, 281n22, 281n26,
298n39, 300n12. See also four great
female impersonators
melodrama: of love, 4, 16, 17, 81, 96, 99,
157, 286n36; origins from the West,
14–16, 277–78n25; in Western “chick
flicks” films, 255. See also communist
revolution: melodrama
Meng Lijun (Meng Lijun), 47, 96, 100–101,
103, 203
minor operas: compared to major operas,
30–32; rising in coastal cities, 35–38;
shaped by female audiences, 38–39. 
See also folk operas
misogyny, xi, 48, 220, 235, 236, 255 
model operas, 196, 234
modern-attire plays: The Prodigal Son as,
224; as revolutionary plays in Yue
opera, 181, 184, 193–94, 196, 200,
224, 231–32; in Shanghai opera, 216,
221
modern culture of love, 6, 215, 216,
302n5
motion pictures, 86, 89, 132, 137
Mulan (Hua Mulan), 34, 92–95, 94, 95,
116, 240, 287n41, 287n62
mundane concerns, x–xi, 21, 201
mundane experiences, xiii–xiv, 240, 256
Nan Wei, 89, 91, 143, 146, 157, 210,
294n23
nation building, x, xi, 68, 253–55, 262;
causes of, 255; ideologies of, 233; 
rhetoric of, 98, 194, 253
Nationalist government, x, xi, 36, 80, 98,
140, 145, 175
Nationalist Party (Guomindang), xi, 140,
190, 202
Nationalist Shanghai Social Affairs
Bureau, 141, 151, 152, 160, 178, 181,
192, 202, 260
native-place factors, 9, 12, 22, 45, 51,
110–20, 151, 159, 164, 220, 252,
289n18, 295n48
New Theater, 46, 85, 107, 216
New Woman, The (Xin nüxing ), 66
New Yue opera, 83, 91, 95, 105, 110, 121,
139, 156, 174, 188, 191, 192, 206
Nine Star Theater, 102, 110, 242
1911 Republican Revolution, 23, 26, 32,
35, 107, 251
Ningbo-Shaoxing immigrants group, 46,
106, 112–15, 128, 131, 252, 289n24
obscenity: in tabloid press, 67; in the-
aters, 27, 28, 45, 73, 83, 84, 102, 152,
170, 178, 191, 235, 236, 286n29,
299n66
occupation authority (Japanese), 20, 21, 98
Old Dam Theater, 58, 117
opera culture, xiii, 136, 251; feminine, 3,
26, 27, 32, 251; of Qing Dynasty, 27,
29, 30–31; in Republican Era, 27, 32
operatic images of women. See female
images
334 Index

=== PDF PAGE 356 ===

oral and performance-related materials,
xii, xiv, 8
Ouyang Yuqian, 65
passion, xiii, 27, 49, 50, 78, 80, 81, 83,
98, 99, 100, 125, 170, 202, 204, 217,
236, 242
patronage: by upper-class men, 123; 
by upper-class women, 123–25; of
women’s opera, 125–32 (see also adop-
tive mothers)
peach-colored news, 61, 165
Pearl Pagoda (Zhenzhu ta), 31, 41, 43, 45,
55, 96
People’s Republic of China, x, 5, 36, 173,
195
performance venues: hierarchy in correla-
tion with audiences and genres, 106–
8, 111; women’s Yue opera as example,
108–11. See also specific site and theater
names
periodization, 258–62
phonograph, 132, 135, 136, 138
ping opera (pingju), 3, 30, 36, 38, 97, 217,
222, 231, 281n13, 281n15, 282n33,
288n67
politics and culture in postwar Shang-
hai, 140–43; CCP measures, 141–
43, 149–50; CCP undergrounds, 143–
50, 145; Nationalist government rules,
140–41 
popular culture, ix, x–xi, xiv, 4–5, 9–16,
20–24, 63, 95, 99, 106, 112, 133, 143,
150, 183, 212–16, 240, 251
popular entertainment, 5–7, 14, 19–20,
24, 98, 107, 132, 143, 148–52, 174,
182–85, 204, 240, 241, 249, 255, 259–
62, 275n5
popular fiction, 4, 9, 11, 13, 15, 22, 230.
See also popular literature
popular literature, x–xi, 4, 11–13, 15, 
71, 75, 80, 233, 273, 275n1, 277n20
PRC Shanghai Cultural Affairs Bureau,
182, 193, 194, 199, 297n21
print media, xii, 142, 150, 154
private feelings, 7, 207, 217, 256
private life, 70, 73
Prodigal Son, The (Langdangzi), 96, 224,
226
professionalism, 67, 91, 260, 261–62
promiscuity, 60, 61, 63, 125
prostitutes, 24, 28, 54, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66,
67, 68, 141, 175, 224, 285n7, 285n10
public culture, xvii, 23, 27, 123, 234, 253,
255; of erotica, 64–66, 68, 71, 96, 172,
219, 253; of Shanghai, 5, 69, 129, 259;
women in, 3, 234
public morality, 27, 34, 64, 67, 77, 98
public sphere, 20, 171
“pure and clean,” 60–69, 125, 130, 167,
179; “carry yourself ”, 68, 73, 163, 175,
177 . See alsoqingbai
Qi Yaxian, 221, 237–39
Qian Huili, 103, 203, 211–12, 215
qingbai, 60–69, 98, 170, 171, 191. See also
pure and clean
Qiu Wenguang, xviii, 135, 270
radio: censorship against, 141; and popu-
lar culture, 11–12, 132–35, 138, 276n9,
293n87, 293n88, 293n93, 293n97;
Soviet Union Station, 88, 131, 134,
152, 287n54; and Yue opera, 93, 120–
21, 131, 152, 157, 161 (see also Chen
Shulian)
reformist discourse, 62, 64–65, 67, 69,
172, 285n7
“Remembrances of the Past” (Shangshi),
17
resistance culture (against Japanese inva-
sion), 20–21, 23, 92, 94
romantic love, 4, 80, 81, 92, 93, 115,
186, 253
Ruan Lingyu, 60, 64–67, 72, 164, 165,
171–72, 277n14
same-sex relations, 205–8, 226–27 . 
See also homosexual relations; sisterly
love
Sanyou Enterprises, 134
self-authorized female representation,
255
sex desegregation in theatrical arts, 52–53
Index    335

=== PDF PAGE 357 ===

sexual desire, 72, 80, 96, 97, 98, 123, 124,
235, 236
sexual object, 62, 64, 65
sexual relations, 4, 63, 72, 99, 125, 166,
236, 250, 284n1, 291n66
sexual scandal, 60, 61, 171, 172 
sexuality, 24, 62, 63, 64, 68, 70, 73, 78,
98, 124, 125, 130, 169
Shan Yangping, 101, 103, 203, 211, 212,
215, 264, 299n79
Shang Xiaoyun, 33, 34, 35, 220
Shanghai Grand Theater, 201, 215, 254,
263
Shanghai Newspaper (Shen bao), 115, 141,
142, 166, 168, 277n20
Shanghai opera (Shenqu, Huju), 3, 4, 9,
12, 18, 19, 38, 51, 68, 114, 166, 200,
222, 242, 275n7, 293n87; actors, 121;
An Antique Coin and The Slave Mother,
261; basic audiences for, 111; Ding
Shi’e, 183; modern-attires plays, 216,
221; and radio programming, 133,
293n93; Shanghai People’s Shanghai
Opera Company, 194, 297n21 
Shanghainese, 12, 13, 21, 113, 267
Shanghai’s Industries and Workers(Shanghai
chanye yu Shanghai zhigong), 117, 119
Shaoxing civil opera, 51, 148
Shaoxing major opera, 42, 51, 57, 77
Shengxian little opera (xiaogeban): enter-
ing Shanghai, 46–51; as minor opera,
30, 31, 37–38, 282n30; origins of, 39–
46; transition to all-female cast, 51–59.
See also Shengxian opera
Shengxian opera (Shengxianxi), 108–9,
295n31; compared with Beijing opera,
38; entering Shanghai, 46–51; girls’
opera schools in, 51–59; King of Zhou
and His Favorite Concubine, Daji, 78; geo-
graphical expansion of, 2; Meng Lijun,
101; patronage of, 123–27; rise of
female troupes in, 75–83, 164, 253,
286n29. See also female Shengxian
opera troupes; male Shengxian opera;
Shengxian little opera
Shengxian story-singers, 40–41, 43, 46
Shi Jihua, 232
sigong scale system (sigong diao), 39, 218,
282n36
Siming Mountain Yue opera, 26, 231–32.
See also gender-straight theaters: Yue
opera
Sister Xianglin (Xianglin sao), 87, 89, 91;
and CCP undergrounds, 143–48; in
the film Stage Sisters, 191–92; the 1948
film, 137–38; the 1978 film, 174; in
print press, 147–48; staging the play,
139–40, 143–50, 253, 294n23; and
Yuan Xuefen, 154, 170, 180–81, 196–
97, 237
sisterly love (jiemei qing), 202–9. See also
same-sex relations
Song Zhiyou, 271
spoken drama, 17–18, 93, 125, 141, 149,
166, 182, 216, 239, 256, 278n46; audi-
ences of, 107, 111; A Doll’s House, 17; 
as intellectual gender-straight theater,
52; as model for Yue opera, 65, 69,
83–86, 191; and Mulan, 93; as resis-
tance culture, 19–20; Wen Tianxiang,
202; and Yue opera staff members, 
86, 88–91
Stage Sisters (Wutai jiemei): the film, 175–
81, 189, 190–94, 195; Yue opera, 202–
5, 206, 207, 208–12, 262
standard Chinese (Mandarin), 8, 9, 18,
27, 113, 218
Star Theater, 47, 110, 139, 143
stigma: on actresses, xiii, 63, 67, 71, 212,
266; on Subei people, 112; on women’s
opera, xi, xiii
Su Jinzou, 208, 210, 269, 270
Su Qing, 21, 22, 23, 120, 233, 279n48,
279n53, 291n55
subalterns, xii, xiv, xv
Subei (Nothern Jiangsu) immigrants, 112,
114, 252, 289n18
Sunrise (Richu), 17
Suzhou story-singing (
pingtan), 12, 13, 89,
121, 134, 166, 200, 242, 293n87 , 293n93
sworn sisters, 167 , 177 , 206, 207, 210, 292n67
Tale of the Western Chamber (Xixiang ji), 186,
246, 261, 298n31
336 Index

=== PDF PAGE 358 ===

Tang Diyin, 131
Teng Jiazhen, 120, 271
theatrical reform, 65, 74, 85, 86, 107,
216, 285n7; rhetoric of, 37, 92, 98,
191, 194, 253; women’s liberation 
and, 153, 172
“Three Transformations” of the enter-
tainment industry (sangai zhengce), 182,
260, 262, 302n10; of entertainers, 182,
183, 184, 190, 260, 262; of stage pro-
ductions, 182, 184, 194, 260, 262; of
structure, 182, 183, 260
Thunderstorm (Leiyu), 17
Tian Han, 137, 139–40, 147, 148, 150,
152–53, 162, 173, 192, 239, 240,
288n64, 294n23
Tong Zhiling, 35, 182
“Touring the Imperial Garden” (You
Shanglin Yuan), 101–2, 103
T ragic Story of Liang Shanbo and Zhu Yingtai
(Liang-Zhu aishi), 102, 104. See also
Butterfly Lovers; Liang Shanbo and Zhu
Yingtai
transvestite plays, 100, 101
transvestitism, 100
treaty-port cities, 4, 10, 23, 26, 36, 251,
280n5
triangle brand audience, 121
union incident, 150–55, 180, 253
unionists, 151–55, 159, 161–62, 171, 180,
181
urban-centered primordial modernity, 258
urban middle class, 75, 106, 252
urban middle-class audience, 75
urban popular culture, ix, 4, 11, 23, 63
urban space: dynamic cultural market,
11–13; in general, 9–10; love drama,
17–18; melodrama, 14–15; Shanghai
images, 10–12; yanqing, 12–13, 16. 
See also native-place factors; Ningbo-
Shaoxing immigrants group
venues for performances, 11, 13, 20, 28,
51, 84, 106, 107, 108, 110, 123, 133,
194, 261, 263
voyeuristic gaze, 63, 65, 71, 253
Wang Anyi, 234
Wang Guowei, 249
Wang Jinshui: and the first girls’ Sheng-
xian opera school, 54, 56
Wang Xiaolai, 113, 160, 192, 295n48
Wang Zhiping, 211, 213, 271, 299n78
war of resistance (against Japan), 18, 20,
26, 58, 144, 206, 231, 239, 240, 260
wartime Shanghai, 119, 240, 278n45;
cultural politics of, 18–21, 40; Mulan,
93; prosperity in, 19; and the rise of
women’s opera, 22–24, 58–59, 234;
and women writers, 21–22, 233
Wei Changsheng: as female impersonator
in Shaanxi clapper opera, 28
Wei Jinshan, 118, 128, 129, 285n18
Wei Shaochang, 4, 94, 118, 128, 129,
271, 291n46, 292n67
Wen Tianxiang (Wen Tianxiang), 83, 84,
202
Western “chick flicks” film, 255
white-collar workers, 106, 112, 118–20,
128, 132, 252, 263, 266, 290n32,
291n54
White-Haired Girl (Baimao nü), 232
Widow Ma’s Inn (Ma Guafu kaidian), 98,
235, 288n67, 288n71
women writers, 22, 23, 233, 234, 275n1,
279n48, 291n55
women’s culture, xi, 5–7, 22, 24, 59, 106,
138, 239, 253, 259
women’s liberation, 26, 32, 35, 38, 47, 62,
93, 153, 172, 185, 237, 259; concept
of, xi, 48; discourse of, 98, 101, 233,
235, 236, 255, 288n74; and free love,
239, 251; rhetoric of, xi, 21, 23, 37, 51,
63, 236, 253, 302n2
women’s narratives, 233–40, 256, 265
women’s suicides: Margery Wolf on, 
235; Ruan Lingyu, 60, 61, 65–67, 171;
Shang Shuihua (character in Stage 
Sisters), 178; Susan Mann on, 236;
Widow Ma, 235, 236, 301n42; Xiao
Dangui, 60, 162, 164–69, 171, 296n71;
Xing Yuehong (character in Stage
Sisters), 204, 209; Zhu Shuizhao, 207
women’s voices, xii, 21, 23, 233
Index    337

=== PDF PAGE 359 ===

Wu Kaixian, 181
Wu Kang, 146
Wu Ping, 97, 118, 120, 134, 136, 217,
221, 222, 271, 291n54, 293n90,
293n100, 301n42
Wu Xiaolou, 157, 158, 188, 271
Wu Yonggang, 14, 66
Xiao-Bai Yumei, 71, 83, 109, 124–25, 170,
271, 285n16, 286n20, 290–91n42,
295n31; and adoptive mothers, 127,
130–31, 131, 292n71; unhappy mar-
riages of, 170; and Yue opera students,
264, 265
Xiao Dangui, 117, 123, 129, 140; as
admirer of Hollywood movies, 286n36;
incident after suicide, 162–72, 253,
292n74, 296n71; as one of ten sisters,
157, 158, 162; and qingbai, 60, 61; stage
photo of, 163; and Stage Sisters, 179,
180; tragic death of, 72, 162, 165, 170,
180; and Yue opera reform, 83; as Yue
opera’s erotic queen, 64, 96–99, 97
Xiao Ya, 213, 299n78
Xie Jin, 175, 176, 197, 202, 297n3
Xu Guangping, 140, 146–47, 152–53,
192, 278n43, 294n23
Xu Jin, 98, 99, 100, 155, 176, 188, 210,
224, 242, 249, 301–2n65
Xu Yulan, 271, 285n16, 286n20, 288n64,
295n31; and adoptive mothers, 83,
130, 131; and Dream of the Red Chamber,
228, 229; in Gold and Beauty, 82; as
immigrant actress, 211; as Jia Baoyu,
228, 242, 244, 245; as one of ten
 sisters, 157, 158; as Prince Liu Chen,
95; with Shanghai Yue Opera House,
183; and Wang Wenjuan, 206, 211; 
as Xiao Dangui’s stage partner, 165,
169, 296n74; as young male imper -
sonators, 225
Xue Yunhuang, 208, 210, 272
Xuesheng Company: and audience, 121;
Butterfly Lovers, 102–5; and CCP, 149,
192–93, 197; and cinema, 137; perfor-
mance venues of, 128; and radio pro-
gramming, 88, 134; staff of, 87–89;
staging Sister Xianglin, 146–47; in union
incident, 154–55
Xun Huisheng, 33, 220
yang gang (masculine and tough), 218
Yang Hansheng, 143, 239–40, 301n54
yanqing, 4, 13, 14, 15, 16, 208, 209, 242
Yao Shuijuan, 71; and adoptive mother
system, 127–28, 129, 292n67; Embroi-
dering the Mandarin Ducks, 279n47; Emer-
ald Hairpin, 279n47; as Hua Mulan in
Hua Mulan, 93, 94; Romantic Death of
Jiang the Fifth, 114; as superstar, 96, 114,
129, 285n18; Tears Over the Lovesick Land,
90; unhappy marriage, 170; and Wei
Shaochang, 128, 292n67; and Yue
opera reform, 83
Yi Bing, 241
Yin Guifang: Baoyu and Daiyu, 228; clos-
est relationships of, 206; establishing
young male role as lead, 223; as Jia
Baoyu, 242; as Jin Yuqing in The Prodi-
gal Son, 226; “love and private feelings”,
217; as male impersonators, 225,
298n31; as one of ten sisters, 157, 158,
162; as Prince Luolan in Desert Prince,
227; Tale of the Western Chamber, 298n31;
in union incident, 151– 55; and Y
ue
Opera reform, 95, 97, 99, 100, 155,
192; and Zhu Shuizhao, 100, 206 
yin rou (feminine and soft), 218
young lady writers, 21, 22, 233
young male impersonators (nü xiaosheng),
85, 122; attacked, 254; homosexual
attraction to patrons, 130; in lead roles
and pursued by fans, 224–29; in ping
opera and boy-singers’ opera, 231; pre-
ferred by audience, 232; as women’s
ideal men, 223. See also names of individual
male impersonators
Yu Ling, 147, 149–50, 153, 157, 160, 173,
179, 180, 192
Yu Shangyuan, 65, 285n15
Yuan Meiyun, 249
Yuan Xuefen: as admirer of Hollywood
films, 286n36; and Butterfly Lovers, 102;
and chai scale system, 218; and Chen
338 Index

=== PDF PAGE 360 ===

Shulian, 120–21; education of, 285n19;
first recording of, 136; first role in
movies of, 137; and fund-raising per-
formance, 156–162, 298n39; as Lin
Daiyu, 242; and Nationalists, 150; as
one of ten sisters, 158; in patriotic
plays (as Hua Mulan), 95; political
career of, 173, 174, 183; revitalization
of Yue opera, 201, 211, 213, 214; and
Sanyou Enterprises and the first radio
show, 134; as the title role in Sister
Xianglin, 143–49, 192, 197, 294n23;
and Stage Sisters, 179–80, 209, 210; 
and Tale of the Western Chamber, 185; 
and Tang Diyin, 131; in the union
incident, 151–55; and women’s libera-
tion rhetoric, 236–38; in Xiao Dangui
incident, 167–70, 168, 286n23; and
Yue opera reform, 72, 75, 83–88, 89,
92, 110, 295n43; and Zhou Enlai, 149;
as Zhu Yingtai, 104
Yue opera actresses, x, xiii, 5, 25, 65, 82,
88, 114, 206, 220, 276n10, 279n47,
298n53; as annunciating subjects, 
234, 253 (see also women’s narratives;
women’s voices); and CCP/left wing,
140, 143, 192–93, 257; in communist
melodrama, 175–76, 178, 180, 182;
forging new identity, 161–62, 172;
general life and status of, 68–72, 206–
8, 265, 285n19, 286n20; impulse for
reform, 72–75; and mass media, 136–
37, 150, 257; and patrons, 114–28 
(see also adoptive mothers; patronage);
and PRC state, 188–90, 212–14; public
images of, 61, 71, 170, 191; and Yue
opera reform, 83–84, 92–97, 287n60
(see also Yue opera reforms)
Yue opera aesthetics, 25, 215, 216–22,
223, 249, 256, 265; on actresses’  bodies,
231, 233; female character modeling,
219–22; music and singing, 218– 19.
See also Dream of the Red Chamber; young
male impersonators (nü xiaosheng)
Yue opera audiences, 24, 115–18, 264,
286n36, 289n1, 294n23
Yue opera constituency, 106
Yue opera fans, 60, 117–22, 250, 265,
267; blocking the train, 228; cotton-
mill workers as, 117; controlling Fan
Ruijuan Club, 122; in Lu Xun Park,
267; notorious for public display of
emotions, xiii, 255; well-educated fans,
264; in Xiao Dangui incident, 60, 165,
170; and Yue opera’s aesthetics, 217,
222, 223; and Yue opera lyrics hand-
books, 133. See also names of individual
fans: Cheng Liping; Dong Qian; Li
Jiang; Qiu Wenguang; Song Zhiyou;
Teng Jiazhen; Wu Ping 
Yue opera history, xvii, 18, 51, 99, 114;
as communist melodrama, 175–80; in
Cultural Revolution, 196–98; in early
PRC period, 180–88; in post-Revolution
era, 198–202; re-constructed as way of
life, 208–12
Yue opera and mass media, 132–38;
motion pictures, 137–38; phonograph
and records, 135–36; prints, 136–37;
radio, 133–35
Yue opera masterpieces, xiv, 25, 99, 100,
102, 185, 222, 245, 257, 261
Yue opera reforms: Kun opera’s influence
on, 91–92; negotiations with theater
bosses, 84–85; spoken drama as model
for, 83–84; staff as headquarters for,
85–91; Xiao Dangui and, 83; Yao Shui-
juan and, 83; Yuan Xufen and, 83–92 
Yue opera staff, 85, 86, 90, 91, 149, 156
Yue opera subgenres: cross-dressing
plays, 100–102, 103 (see also Meng
Lijun); erotic plays, 96–98 (see also
Widow Ma’s Inn); exotic plays, 99–100
(see also Desert Prince
); family morality
plays, 96 (see also The Prodigal Son);
love tragedies, 102–5, 104 (see also
Butterfly Lovers); patriotic and revolu-
tionary plays, 92–96 (see also Mulan);
romantic love plays, 98–105; thematic,
92–105 
Yue opera ten sisters, 155–62, 158, 159,
181, 188, 206, 222, 296n48
Yue opera theater: advantage as all-
female theater, 81–83; crude eroticism 
Index    339

=== PDF PAGE 361 ===

Yue opera theater (continued)
and cleansing in, 75–77; general 
situation in 1930s, 73–74; stylistic
differences between male and female
troupes in, 77–81, 78
Yue opera theater owners, 69, 70, 84, 
85, 90, 129, 155, 156, 169, 177, 
230
Yulan Company, 189
Zhang Chunfan, 129, 131, 292n74;
involvement in Xiao Dangui incident,
60, 164–70, 168, 236, 284n1, 296n71;
as model for Manager Tang in Stage
Sisters, 179, 180; as strongman in
charge of Yue Opera Employers’
Union, 152
Zhang Chunqiao, 193
Zhang Dai: comments on feminine
beauty of all-women opera, 233
Zhang Rongbiao, 109, 189, 272, 285n16,
286n20
Zhang Yanqiu, 109, 189, 272, 285n16,
286n20
Zhao Naixue, 131
Zhao Zhigang, 211, 232
Zhedong Theater, 97, 164
Zheng Guofeng, 101, 211
Zhi Lanfang, 242
Zhou Baokui, 132, 189, 272, 292n86,
295n31
Zhou Enlai, 142, 149, 173, 180, 182,
185, 188, 288n64
Zhou Xinfang, 69, 150, 158, 160, 173,
174, 183, 298n39
Zhou Xuan, 249
Zhu Shuizhao: as founder of Yunhua
Company, 183; idolized by fans, 221;
as Li Ping in The Prodigal Son, 226; as
one of ten sisters, 157, 296n48; pri-
mary-school education of, 285n19; as
Princess Yili in Desert Prince, 227; rela-
tionship with Yin Guifang, 100, 206–
8, 226, 227; in union incident, 151, 154
340 Index